this is my first Wiki experience - I guess I'm a WikiVirgin! I hope to be able to use this type of environment to start a small community, and expand it to the web community. I see a lot of potential in Wiki. Thanks very much to the creators for allowing us this opportunity to experimenet!

Thanks,
Anthony


September 24, 2010 -

I guess this is becoming a blog. So I'll start with what's going on right now. Today is Mom's birthday and I need to call her. I have been trying to call or visit as much as I can since Dad died a few weeks ago. She is handling it well, and has wonderful support from Joe. I feel for the guy. He's stuck in a position where everything was taken from him, and now he's back home. He told me recently that taking care of Mom and Dad gives him a sense of purpose. I'm glad to hear that, because Joe is a good guy, and I hate to see him go through any more than he has already.

Work is....well work. If it was fun it wouldn't be called work. I'm sure that's a stolen quote from someone like Yogi Berra, but I don't care. I have too many projects and not enough time. But, I would rather be busy than bored. I just wish I could catch up so that I can start planning ahead.

Evan finished 5th for the team in the cross country meet last night, so his score counted in the win. I should talk with him about natural ability and how far that can take you before you need to start putting in that extra effort. He works really hard, and runs a lot, but I think if he wants it, he could run like Justin within two years. If he doesn't want it, that's ok too, and he will do fine in CC. Alex is keeping his head up and working hard to keep a spot on the football team. I think this is good for him. He needs to have to really want something, and really work for it. Kathleen is wonderful as ever. I am the luckiest man alive to have such a wonderful wife, and best friend. I would be lost without her. She has clinical today and then we are working the football game. Tomorrow we are going to the Iowa game with the Powells. So sweet of them to invite us along. 

Until next time,
Anthony