cmavo (LojbanLanguage words) which do not affect the meaning of a bridi but which denote the speaker's feeling toward it. Essentially voiced facial expressions.

mi klama = I go

mi klama .ui = I go :)

See SmileyFaces.
----
	.ua	discovery			confusion
	.u'a	gain				loss
	.ue	surprise	no surprise	expectation
	.u'e	wonder				commonplace
	.ui	happiness			unhappiness
	.u'i	amusement			weariness
	.uo	completion			incompleteness
	.u'o	courage		timidity	cowardice
	.uu 	pity				cruelty
	.u'u	repentance	lack of regret	innocence

	.o'a	pride		modesty		shame
	.o'e	closeness	detachment	distance
	.oi	complaint/pain	doing OK	pleasure
	.o'i	caution		boldness	rashness
	.o'o	patience	mere tolerance	anger
	.o'u	relaxation	composure	stress

	.ii	fear		nervousness	security
	.i'i	togetherness			privacy
	.io	respect				disrespect
	.i'o	appreciation			envy
	.iu 	love		no love lost	hatred
	.i'u	familiarity			mystery

	.a'a	attentive	inattentive	avoiding
	.a'e	alertness			exhaustion
	.ai	intent		indecision	refusal
	.a'i	effort		no real effort	repose
	.a'o	hope				despair
	.au	desire		indifference	reluctance
	.a'u	interest	no interest	repulsion

	.e'a	permission			prohibition
	.e'e	competence			incompetence
	.ei	obligation			freedom
	.e'i	constraint	independence	resistance to constraint
	.e'o	request				negative request
	.e'u	suggestion	no suggestion	warning

	.ia	belief		skepticism	disbelief
	.i'a	acceptance			blame
	.ie	agreement			disagreement
	.i'e	approval	non-approval	disapproval

These are adjustable as follows:
	  cai     sai     ru'e   cu'i   nairu'e naisai  naicai
goes from extreme feeling to extreme negative feeling. Sai is always understood.

	ro'a	social		asocial		antisocial
	ro'e	mental				mindless
	ro'i	emotional			denying emotion
	ro'o	physical			denying physical
	ro'u	sexual				sexual abstinence
	re'e	spiritual	secular		sacrilegious

categorizes the emotion. A full discussion can be found at http://www.lojban.org/publications/reference_grammar/chapter13.html

----

There are some other modifiers that can color the scales in addition to the ro'X categories.  These same keywords get copied over & over too much, so I'm going to try to give y'all a fresh description. :) 
 
"le'o" is the aggressiveness of an attitudinal.  For instance ".oi" expresses some kind of pain or complaint, so ".oile'o" is like: HEY!  That hurts me and I'm going to hurt you back!  ".oile'onai" on the other hand emphasizes defending against the pain.  ".oile'ocu'i" is in the middle, neither aggressive nor defensive. 
 
"ju'o" is how certain you are of something.  "ju'o" means certainly, "ju'onai" means certainly not, and "ju'ocu'i" means uncertainty. 
 
"be'u" is whether the attitude is about something you need ("be'u"), something you've got enough of ("be'ucu'i"), or something you have too much of ("be'unai").  For instance ".aube'unai" would mean "I want it even though I have too much already".. ".oibe'u" means ouch, I need something.  ".a'unaibe'unai"-- I'm sick of that, I've had too much! 
 
"fu'i" I don't really understand very well yet, but as I understand it it's similar to be'u in that it's sort of more about the cause of the feeling than the feeling itself.  "fu'i" is about easiness, and "fu'inai" is about difficulty. 
 
"vu'e" is whether the feeling is virtuous or not!  ".uivu'enai" is sinful happiness, for instance.  ".a'avu'e" means "I'm being good and paying attention!" 
 
"ga'i" marks that you're of a higher rank than the thing you're describing, "ga'icu'i" that you're of an equal rank, and "ga'inai" that you're of a lower rank.  I've always thought that the closeness of "ga'inai" (I'm totally submitting) and "ga'icai" (I rule extremely) was just close enough you might maybe put just a hint of a "sh" in your "ga'inai", if someone were making you say "ga'inai" (if the world were later ruled by Lojban speaking androids). 
 
"zo'o" shows how serious you are about something.  "zo'o" means that you're kidding around, "zo'onai" that you're being very serious, and "zo'ocu'i" that you're just like, talking, no worries. 
 
"se'i" shows whether the beneficiary or focus of the emotion is on yourself, or on someone else.  ".ause'i" is wanting it for yourself, ".ause'inai" is wanting it for someone else.  ".uise'i" is being happy for yourself, ".uise'inai" is being happy for someone else. 
 
"se'a", as I understand it at the moment, is whether you are the agent of the feeling, or someone else is.  ".uise'a" means that you make yourself happy, whereas ".uise'anai" means that someone else makes you happy. 
 
"ri'e" shows whether the emotion is bursting out ("ri'e") or is under control ("ri'enai"). 
 
"bu'o" is a word that helps show the contours of emotions.  "bu'o" means that an emotion is starting, "bu'ocu'i" that it's continuing, and "bu'onai" that it's ending.  For instance, ".uibu'o", I'm starting to feel happy.  ".oibu'onai", I don't hurt anymore.  ".o'ubu'ocu'i", I still feel relaxed. 
 
Phew, that's some attitudinal modifiers!  BTW, anyone who's interested in Lojban's attitudinals should check out Cniglic, a new language I've invented/discovered that uses Lojban's attitudinals on English text. 
 
 --Mungojelly