''Luke Skywalker'': I don't believe it!

''Yoda'': That is why you fail.

----

"Debate" moved to WishfulThinkingCausesBadLuck.

----

In the movie Jumanji, when children in the 1960s opened the game box, the pieces moved by themselves to their starting positions.

The children said, "It must use magnets!"

In the 1990s, new children see the pieces moving by themselves. They say, "It must use microprocessors!"

Our favorite concept, today, is the "iterative attractor". This is a point is a phase space that all flows converge on.

The BCR concept, in enJineering terms, is that there is a "great attractor in the sky", and that what goes around comes around.

----

''Because time only appears linear, the feedback loop works outside it. That leads to unfalsifiable pep-talks like this:''

The outer experience is simply a reflection of the inner.  The creative process unfolds 
continually, infinitely, constantly.  You cannot miss it. It's going to happen whether you pay 
attention or not.  So the question becomes: how do you create the inner experience with the 
most harmony and ingredients of joy or the ingredients you seek in the outer?  

The answer is, you train your attention away from the outer long enough to perceive how the 
inner process works.  Once you have perceived how the inner process works, that is, you have 
lined up the details of the inner mechanisms: thoughts, beliefs, feelings, emotions, tendencies, 
influences, choices. Then you are free to go back and watch the outer reflect the new 
understanding.  

It is not that you live in life focused only on the inner, you could do that without a life, or a 
physical manifestation of life.  The objective here is to live in life in the outer, from the inner.  
Which, if you understand, you do every time you open your eyes.  All the sense perceptions 
you receive are your creation.  The more powerful your rational training, the more time it takes 
to get this turned around correctly, unless you an use your rational training to help you.  The 
difference seems to be in the conundrum or paradox of experiencing the outer physical reality 
as real while knowing it's a creation of our inner being.  

For example:  This table we see is real.  Just as you and I are real.  And if you attempt to raise 
your leg through the table, you will encounter its reality.  And this is a place of confusion for 
many of you.  But remember, we are not asking you to deny what is, just to recognize its 
source. This table is here with you precisely because you chose it to be.  And the further you 
go on this path of understanding, the more flexible and fluid physical matter will become.  But 
this is not a change in physical matter.  But a change in your ability to perceive and focus.  

The most difficult challenges come when you confront those areas which you still regard as real 
and outside of yourself.  

...

So here is the paradox.  The conscious mind seeks inward for resolution of what will outwardly 
be experienced by the conscious mind.  It is not so difficult to understand.  But it is true that 
many beings on your physical plane attach their identification so strongly to the conscious mind 
and its habits and ways of thinking, and what could erroneously be called "predispositions" that 
the beings themselves are unable to use the conscious mind effectively.  It is as if using the 
power of creation to experience life you decide that a portion of your creation is in control of 
the experience and you further decide that this portion that is in control is fixed.  Otherwise 
how could you possibly say "That's just the way I am" or "It's my genetic heritage".  Etc etc 
etc. The evidence for the opposite truth is all around you.  For without absolute freedom none 
of you could possibly change any of your circumstances.  And the extent to which you learn 
discernment and choice to replace limitation and restriction and the extent to which you 
understand the power of the self in face of all experience, there is no circumstance you cannot 
overcome. The foundation of your being is built on this model.  And everything, every evidence 
to the contrary is in its simplest form, an opportunity to choose a new perspective.  

--Gradus & Ragon

----

''The outer experience is simply a reflection of the inner.''

Which tends to confuse young gulls learning high-performance flying.  So Jonathan would say, "Let's begin with level flight."

----

See WhatYouResistPersists, DisciplineAndDogma.