A collection of ex-developers who are now managers that congregate in a room and decide how the system should be implemented.

------ This doesn't really jibe with the definition in the classic book - "Industry pundits disseminate marketing information that concerns consumers." ??

You mean a "PHB compliant design-by-committee anti-pattern leveraged infrastructure"

BHJ is a "Mini AntiPattern" which is really just a rant since it doesn't provide a full AP template... but here's the text from the book:

AntiPattern Problem: The opinions of so-called industry experts often influence technology decisions.  Controversial reports that criticize particular technologies frequently appear in popular media and private publications.  In addition to our technical responsibilities, we have spent too much time answering the concerns of  managers and decision-makers arising from these reports.  Many of these so-called experts are misinformed. Occasionally, they present biased viewpoints.  Often, the information that they are reporting is second-hand. Rarely is there any hands-on research and experience backing up their conclusions.  

Refactored Solution: An in-house expert on each key technology is an invaluable asset to every organization.  An in-house expert can discriminate between facts, misinformation, and opinions in popular media and other reports.  If your organization does not have in-house experts, you can appoint staff to follow particular technologies and develop their expertise through reading, training courses, standards activities, and hands-on experiments.

Electronic mailing lists often contribute to misinformation.  Avoid forwarding press releases to mailing lists.  Press releases are properly called propaganda.  In other words, press releases provide selected information that benefits a particular organization.  Alternatively, have the in-house expert, disseminate a factual summary of important announcements.

(contributed by Skip)

Distinguish this carefully from TechnologyDecisionsBasedOnNewspaperArticles. Sadly this is not a joke. A friend told me that a Computer Science department chair made decisions based on what he read in the WallStreetJournal.
