One of the unethical strategies or techniques used to abandon LegacyCode that "has worked for 16 years" and whose proponents, if any remain, say "leave it alone!" 

----
Which is not the same as "MakeItWorkOnNewHardware", or Use a "Modernized Compiler or Interpreter" which is really let's "use it (convert it) so ItWorks on the "New Hardware", which may mean "Create New Code" to meet some "New Requirements".

----
A rant on strategy:

When working on the code, a change is made in the code that breaks things in such a way as "ItNoLongerWorks". Then in an attempt to fix it break a few more things, and say "I know how to fix it, but it will take some time". (Job Insurance Strategy)

Now I know that this strategy has never, and will never, be used, because "We just don't do things like this". At least I don't know of a case where it has been, but currently in the language there has crept in a sense of "if it is, or its proponents are "old", or "old school", it, or they, need to be put out to pasture, or placed where, "they can do no harm", to that which is currently in vogue.

To say that this could not be the case does not square with the realities of the current workplace, where if you or the technology is "over 42", it seems the strategy is "don't use it or them" in current projections or expansions, but instead use "New Technology" or "New Blood" which is first and foremost "cheaper" and more "effective" in the "long run". Proponents of such strategies must be careful and couch their language and pronouncements in such a way as to not "discriminate on the basis of age". Of course, "No one is doing this", at least not with those who are their friends (or in a peer group which is determined in part, on the age of its members, or their commonly accepted way of doing things). In this way one can make it a strategy of "inclusion" rather than one of "exclusion or discrimination" After all, we are on "TheBrink", don't you know.

(end of rant)
----
CategoryFuture