A guy living in Everett, WA

I like learning stuff and sometimes building things from what I've learned.  Whether it's new software, or public policy, I have a flawed zealous nature about doing the right thing and doing things right. (see Russell Ackoff note below).

I've always been interested in how things work and how to bring about change. Software is just one aspect of improving an organization's performance. If the architecture ain't right you should not have high expectations for peoples performance within it and if the people living within an architecture do not see a need to change then change over time is not possible.

My public service and public policy experience has taught me that change only occurs as the people in career positions change jobs. Unlike in software where technical performance within a competitive market will eventually determine your survival, government suffers from comfortable employees unable or unwilling willing to change the way they do things. It's only when retirement, re-organization or redesign (new legislation) occurs do things change.

I like Russell Ackoff's 'doing the right thing' approach - in particular the video of his systems thinking presentation at Chicago-Kent College of Law in 2000 - Making a Difference: Systems Thinking / Systems Change  - http://a2j.kentlaw.edu/Presentations/GirlsLink/ ) For short summary of what he is about see: http://ackoff.villanova.edu/public_html/ackoff99.pdf - pg32 - and a quote from him when it comes to design and testing:
     :    ...the revelation that most large social systems are pursuing objectives other than the ones they proclaim, and that the ones they pursue are wrong.  They try to do the wrong thing righter and this makes what they do wronger.  It is much better to do the right thing wrong than the wrong thing right because when errors are corrected it makes doing the wrong thing wronger, but the right thing righter.

How do any of us know we are doing the right thing?

How do people make changes in the way they work (see PeterScholtes - "The Team Handbook" and "The Leaders Handbook") he talks about losing the carrot and stick approach to management - for the long term good of the organization they don't work - the underlying assumption is that people need a kick in the pants but in reality it's about relationships, trust and accountability.

----
CategoryHomePage