Welsh actor, best known for role as Wesley/DreadPirateRoberts in ThePrincessBride.  Also played Robin Hood in the Mel Brooks spoof "Men In Tights", were he uttered the immortal line:

	 :	''Unlike some other Robin Hoods, I can speak with an English accent!''

Also in "Liar Liar" with Jim Carrey, "Twister" with Bill Paxton & Helen Hunt, and many other films (the list of more than 35 begins in 1979 and continues through present day). Blond, therefore unlikely ever to be a major Hollywood leading man.

----

Strangely true about that blond business. Try to come up with blond major leading men in Hollywood. Robert Redford is obvious. Beyond that, one has to really put on the thinking cap. Leslie Howard. But he died in WWII, so no one knows what staying power he would have had. Alec Guiness, perhaps? Peter O'Toole. Peter Lawford, but he's kind of an also-ran in the Rat Pack. (So far the non-Redford entries are British Isles.) Gene Wilder. But he's comedy, not "leading man." Randolph Scott, but whatever happened to him? Aha! Burt Lancaster! Then there's the ubiquitous Marty Milner, but he never "led" anything other than ''Adam 12.'' Tab Hunter doesn't count.

''Burt Lancaster isn't blond! See http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000044/photogallery''

I've always thought he had blond eyebrows, which makes him blond in my book.

Peter Graves and James Arness were blond. Arness co-starred in some John Wayne vehicles, assorted dramas, and '50s SF (''Them!'') until he led on TV in ''Gunsmoke.'' Graves led in some really lousy '50s SF until he led on TV in ''Mission: Impossible.'' Elwes is probably best known for ''Princess Bride,'' fantasy genre. Maybe it's tough for blond men to lead in non-genre Hollywood movies, though Steve Mc''''''Queen was reasonably blond and a leading man in Hollywood films. Nevertheless, Mc''''''Queen's big break was a genre flick: ''The Blob.'' Maybe Hollywood blonds tend to lead on TV (like Martin Milner), not in films.

Then there are the Euro blonds who sometimes do Hollywood: Leslie Howard, Peter O'Toole (but I seriously think he's brunet with a bleach job), Peter Lawford, Max von Sidow, Rutger Hauer, Dolf Lundgren (but he doesn't lead, I think).

Then there's Leonardo Di''''''Caprio.  ''Whenver he's the leading man, he winds up dead...''

William Macy is blond, and he doesn't always wind up dead.

Well, there must be some patterns in here...

"Redford look like a red head to me!"   http://www.freedomforum.org/graphics/2001/06/photos/redford.robert.6-4-01.jpg
[Ok strawberry blond]

''He doesn't even look like a human in that photo. The colors are too saturated but there's not enough green. Get a load of the fiery red skin, pink eyes, and pink teeth. Hence, the hair color is wrong.''

----
OffTopic, OffTopicIsOk