A thought occurred to me after seeing the large number of recent pages condemning the USA's methods of external relations - how well do we compare to some of the others?

Afghanistan - The Taliban enforces a draconian version of Islamic law that oppresses women, endangers people of other faiths, and enforces severe corporal punishment for (relatively) low-ranking crimes.

UK - has no guarantee of rights against the government (Official Secrets Act and its kin), and holds one province by force of arms (Ulster). ''While not wishing to defend UK policy in Northern Ireland, no it doesn't. The majority don't want to cede from the UK - now, how that majority came to be there is an interesting subject...'' Fought a true war against Argentina over a small group of islands of little use.

France - censors references to a former enemy government, uses military commandos to sink a ship from an environmental protest group.

China - oppresses religious groups, occupies Tibet, Tienanmen Square. (Tiananmen?)

Hmmmm. While I certainly see that the USA has areas where it has not been the best, I hardly see that it is the horrible entity that it critics make it out to be.

----

USA - will incarcerate you for growing a plant.

''Compare to the recent execution of a women for adultery in one of the Middle/Near Eastern nations.''

That's beside the point. The above finds it necessary to find fault with Britain and France, so why doesn't it mention the problems America has? Executions of people with only a mockery of due process, terrible environmental regulations in certain parts, and illegality of certain political parties come to mind. Of course, this is somehow made up for by the fact that everyone can carry guns.  Let's not be too hypocritical.

'Ah, but none of those other countries go around using large bombs and economic sanctions to force other countries to be just like them. The US still maintains spheres of influence and plain imperialists policies. Not to mention trying to assassinate people we don't like and training people like Bin Laden.'

----

Of course, the USA are not at all the worst, but they are the strongest, so also the effect is stronger. And they are claiming they are the best and justify their actions with this claim. The USA are not more or less "God's own country" than any other. And their fight is not the fight of the Good against the Evil, it's the fight for their interests.

see also NineteenEightyFour, NineteenEightyFourReligiousPerspective
----
CategoryComparisons