People often go out of their way to delete pages that don't have (much) content. But many such are placeholders (and fertilizer - See FromFertilizerComeFlowers) for content to come. Please click on backlinks and see what a page's context is (and maybe even add some content yourself!) before just zapping it.

''This is essentially one person's writing (although conceivably a small minority agree with it); this is not a page that reflects a norm or partial norm for wikiwiki -- certainly the topic of norms is always somewhat controversial, but there are other pages that go back many many years, with many contributors. This page is simply one person's opinion.''

''Therefore, don't cite it as an opposing norm. It's an opposing '''opinion''', which is different.''

''I would say that the voice of experience says that there really isn't a lot of logical argument to support the opinion on this page. The better contributors and gnomes do in fact consider backlinks, and do in fact consider adding content to a page, rather than reflexively deleting a page blindly, so this advice is (A) preaching to the choir, that's already common practice, and (B) beyond that, advocates retaining pages with no content, which is many years since already agreed to be wrong practice.''

* I agree with the previous contributor in that the better contributors and gnomes do not blindly delete nearly content-free pages, but make an assessment. I feel, however, that some pages are deleted that should have been given time to be found by someone who could genuinely contribute.  I think it's not the fact that the page's content is small that should be the deciding factor.  I believe the page's title should have a lot to say.  If a page is largely content-free '''and''' its title clearly shows that it's OffTopic or near OffTopic, then by all means delete it and unsmash any DanglingLink''''''s.  Sometimes, however, the title shows that there is page potential, and I think the page should be given time to collect people saying "Yes - I'd like to know more" or "Here - this is what I know."  Let's not commit AjiKeshi.