Similar to MusicNotationSystems but describe dance. Examples are LabaNotation and BeneshNotation.

''While interesting, and aspects are definitely related to programming, I suggest that LabaNotation and BeneshNotation don't really need separate pages to themselves. Could I suggest that some WikiGnome fold them into this page? We can split them out later if the discussion takes us that way.''

''Just a thought.''
----

DanceXml
----
Sometimes just animated pictures are enough to remember steps. However it is hard to find free ones on the web. A good one is 
http://www.bustamove.com/cgi-bin/scripts/post_link.pl?p=salsa&d=&b=528269625808
see bottom for free quicktime links for Salsa
----
Then there's the Aresti aerocryptographical system for diagramming the sequences flown by aerobatic pilots: http://www.iac.org/begin/figures.html 
Ever since my introduction to it, I've enjoyed its almost-modular design. Watching an airplane twist and tumble in a seemingly chaotic way in the sky, and then discovering that the entire sequence was actually encoded on paper first, is a pretty fun example of "real life" program execution. --DerekWade
----
Has anyone tried a dance notation for tango?

''Which Tango? Both LabaNotation and BeneshNotation work for modern ballroom tango, and with slight variations work for Argentine Tango. Also, there is a variant of the "footprints in the sand" method that works well for any modern ballroom (Waltz, Quickstep, Foxtrot, Viennese Waltz and Tango) giving foot placements, heel vs toe vs flat vs toe-heel, etc., and turn.''

I'm learning tango and looking for a notation to remember the sequences. Do you know any URLs or books that explain how to use a dance notation specifically on argentinean tango (keep in mind that the male torso movement almost defines the female steps).

''None off-hand. You must remember that notations take time to learn, both reading (easier) and writing (much harder). You would probably be better to devise your own cryptic notes covering timing, direction of steps and position of partner. Then use them constantly, not just to help you remember your own notation, but also to help you remember the steps. I drew lines to indicate my movement (centre of gravity) with L and R in the right places, and counts to help remember the timing. I then drew small symbols to indicate my partner's position relative to me - her position is entirely defined by mine. Knowing where she should be then told me everything I needed because of exactly what you say - my torso movements put her there.''

----
Has anyone tried a dance notation for tango?

''It might be interesting for you to have a look at a notation that I designed particularly for Tango.
A preliminary version of an introduction to that notation can be found at 
http://www.informatik.hu-berlin.de/~bodirsky/tango/
I would be happy if you let me know whether you find that text and the notation helpful.''

I would like to view this tango notation but link was not accessible.

---
There is a notation called Rasche Notation, designed for Argentine Tango.