A SchemeLanguage development environment freely available for Unix, Windows, and Macintosh.

http://www.drscheme.org/

DrScheme is optimized for education: it offers different subsets of the language for students at different levels, and on the simplest level can be used to step through each stage in the evaluation of a procedure call.

DrScheme uses the MrEd graphics toolkit and MzScheme, a Scheme implementation providing an object system, an exceptions, and other goodies.

There is also a static debugger MrSpidey that can be downloaded separately and integrated into DrScheme.

DrScheme has now become DrRacket as part of the renaming in 2010. See RacketLanguage.

----
PLT Needs You!

PLT needs your help. From the mailing list:

Financial support for our implementation and infrastructure work is running out over the next year. I am hoping to raise money from the National Science Foundation (NSF) with a proposal to the infrastructure initiative. The purpose of this initiative is to help with the maintenance of projects that are useful in research and advanced development, but also teaching and education. The emphasis is on the former two; the latter two are acknowledged, and I don't think we need to worry about the latter.

So, if you have used DrScheme/MzScheme/MrEd/Web Server etc for research or advanced development and you don't want the project to die, could you please send a short one-page, signed letter of support to me c/o Eli Barzilay on some formal looking letter head please? The letter should state what you do, where you work, and that you have used PLT Scheme for research and advanced development. If you are so inclined, you can also add that it is critical and what you have done with it.

For addresses, see below. Thanks! -- Matthias

P.S. Electronic signatures are okay, too, indeed they are ideal.

Matthias Felleisen
c/o Eli Barzilay
Trustee Professor
College of Computer Science
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115

The deadline for letters of support is 1 July 2005.

----

MrEd is based on the WxWidgets library. With it, one can write GUIs in Scheme
"once" and then run them "everywhere" (well, at least *nix, Mac & Windows).

This is definitely a serious option for anyone wanting to do development in
a Lispy language.

-- StephanHouben

----

Ah shoot, I wanted something like DrWiki.

DrScheme: Next patient, please.

Fred: I'm feeling overwhelmed by all the global variables in this legacy code...

''A little more gauze...''

----
'''Libraries and extensions''' 

	* http://www.cs.utah.edu/plt/develop/ - extensive collection
	* '''PLT Scheme Software''' : official site - http://www.plt-scheme.org/software/
	* '''SchemeWiki''' - collection of libraries not specific to Dr Scheme
----
CategoryScheme