[CategoryHomePage]

'Ello.  Not really much to say at this point, but I'll probably fill in a bit later.  If you're wondering if I'm the EdGrimm you knew in high school, probably not - there's at least four of us, that's based just on those who've contacted me.  Probably any of them could tell better how many there are, because they were explicitly looking for that info.  If you're looking for the one who could easily tell you that there were 15 in the states, and several outside the states, tell you what they all do, tell you how many people there are with your name, and what all of those people's computer passwords are, that was only a nasty rumor.  None of it was true.  Or, maybe, I'm not that EdGrimm.

PS.  Other EdGrimm-type people should feel free to use this space.  It may clutter up our bookmarks with unrelated comments, and it could make psychologists think they have the perfect target for a fortune-earning case study, but it would be no more demented than my time at college, where some of us pretended no distinction between people named Ed.
----
One thing I've noticed on this set of web pages is that everyone here seems to like OO programming languages; languages like C and LisP are not mentioned much.  I personally think that the practices of ExtremeProgramming apply as much if not more to these languages - the OOPL everyone discusses have safeguards in place to 'save' you from needing refactoring, that make encapsulation 'easier'.  (Note that I put those in quotes; I personally think that they just make it more obvious how to program without needing to refactor everything, and how to encapsulate.  From what I've seen of OO code, garbage code occurs as frequently in both types of language, or possibly more, due to people who don't understand programming choosing an OOPL to save them, when it can't.)

While I have nothing against Smalltalk, C++, and Eiffel, I think it's a shame that this site is so utterly focused on them.  Admittedly, it does have quite a bit to do with what the people who edit wiki use.
-- EdGrimm


If its any consolation, wiki itself is not object-oriented. -- WardCunningham

	* http://c2.com/cgi/wikibase

It's not that I'm against OOP, rather I think it isn't the end-all be-all to programming; I don't feel that it's always the solution, nor do I feel that it necessarily makes things easier.  It sometimes does, but not always.  -- EdGrimm

----

Pages I'm working on (but aren't properly linked from where they are to be placed)

	ValueObjectsShouldBePassedByValue

Pages I started

	LittleLanguage