The opposite of EgolessProgramming.

I claim that being egotist is better than being egoless if:

	1. You share your knowledge with others in the form of advice and suggestions. This requires that you also listen carefully for their advice and suggestions. Why would egoist programmers share their knowledge? Because you will have no less knowledge by sharing it and besides from time to time you will benefit by doing so.

	1. You think you can (IthinkICan) do it. Whatever you are asked to do, you don't look for reasons why that can't be done, but you simply try to find different ways to do it and JustDoIt.

Being egotist is not so bad if you use that energy wisely and without hurting anyone. Also this requires that when you finish something, you allow other people to use it or modify it. Egoism must last a finite period of time, namely until you finish implementing the requested functionality.

----
----

''You'd think this page would be signed. . . EgolessWiki doesn't seem appropriate here'' -- EgoistWiki

I'm too egotist to sign it... ;-)

''Me too''

----

Compare these two scenarios.

#1, someone approaches you and says:
"Hey, I was thinking about this design problem in the Fnarflanger." 
You reply, "I already got that design hammered out - I'd be amused to hear what you think is wrong with it." 
He says, "Well..  it's just that the flambledanger and the doofrenper don't match up." 
You say, "Apparently you don't know the first thing about flambledangers. If you want to talk design, go learn something about it first."

Clearly, this is a case of EgotistProgramming.

#2, you approach someone and say:
"That code you wrote for the snarselwagon driver is all screwed up. This project doesn't call for gremptems at all - it's super overkill. The way I did it in the prestwert project is the best way - you need to change yours to work that way."

Clearly, this is also a case of EgotistProgramming.

You arrive at situation #1 or #2 depending on which participant has the ego.

----
----
CategoryCriticism