Terminology used in describing QuantumMechanics.

EigenStates are the states that could exist after a QuantumWaveFunction collapses.

The most simple example would be light as either a particle or a wave, until collapsed by observation it exists in both EigenStates.

Not a great deal of reference to programming except in thinking about what program paths are still available and which options have been collapsed out.  The most basic options being either ones or zeros, incidentally did you ever wonder about that being on the power switch to your box and the ability to do "work" or not.  Ah, energy sources abound to divide that power source up massively parallel, but also bit wise on or off, totally dense as a quantum black hole or superfluid like a graviton 10 to the negative 34th power or so.  All through the permitivity of free space,  a bosonic field.... We must understand one thing about collapsing the wave function, it really occupies two things, a scalar and a vector, when taking the space time approach to this state of affairs we get something four dimentional called a tensor, and allows for computers to do things such as imaging and things like that. Collapsing a tensor gives us something in three dimentions that we can visualize.  I am not saying this as though I know anything but just want to show the reader that I am learning by reading history and making predictions, thus I myself embody the giant wave function we call the universe.  Perhaps human consciousness is the collapse of the wave function in the spirit of R. Steiner type thinking.   So go pursue your eigenstates by branching this way and that!  R Feynman once said that "something's got to happen" and talked of "events"  In this way of thinking and event collapses to a little wiggle in space time.  Wiggle science is cool!  Information theory is how computing can fit into the quantum picture.  Quantum is easier and deals in compact spaces, and neat math, but classical is also important too.  How to get from zero to one in a normalized and smooth manner is not geometrically possible, so our kernels will always be mere versions, rather than a perfect product, this writing is only beta stage and so perhaps it will grow from the kernel in a manifold way.  It is scary that this is the first reference, and that's why I wanted to add to it, so that it may collapse into smaller and smaller wiggles with higher and higher energies over space time.  This is wierd and strange stuff indeed.  I saw the show "Numbers" on TV and wondered about Eigen values or Eigen states, but really still do not have trancendental understanding of what they mean. ---mjeub@visi.com 
----
This is the first reference on Google when you search for "Eigen States" That is sort of scary when you think about it. -- BrianMcCallister
