A pastor with a PhD.  His current focus is on restoring marriages using the Ephesians 5:33 verse - "Husbands love your wives.  Wives respect your husbands."

In his book, "Love and Respect," Eggerichs builds a compelling case that men and women are designed differently (Big shocker for some!).  His point is that women know, understand, and need love.  Men know, understand, and need respect.  Failing to understand this, puts us on the Crazy Cycle.  "Without love - she responds - without respect - he responds - Without love - (picture this around a circle, creating an InfiniteLoop).

For a few decades, we have been inundated with books on Love.  While crucial to relationships, it has missed a vital need felt in the core of men.  The lives, friendships, work, and family relationships of men are seen through the lens of RESPECT (in an interesting twist, the song R-E-S-P-E-C-T was originally written and sung by a man).  Eggerichs shows that, just as we are expected by God to love each other unconditionally, He also expects us to treat each other respectfully - unconditionally. 

The concept is reviving ruined marriages and saving families.

-- BrucePennington

''Hi, Bruce. I'm glad you've found a helpful book during your wiki sabbatical. Any chance of moving this page to TheAdjunct? -- Eliz''

Eliz! Good to hear from you.  Wonderful things have been happening.  My wife is turning her heart to God and to our family!  It has been worth the struggle and the wait.  

Concerning the move -- I respect your position and have created a similar page on TheAdjunct to save you some time.  Do what you must with this one, but I will not do it.  I'm sure you are quite familiar with my views on the censorship on C2.  It is not possible to discuss the "People" aspect that this site stands for without getting into deeper and deeper levels of "People."  Certain "People" that manage C2 have drawn an artificial line in the sand when the discussion reaches a level of depth that THEY don't want to discuss. -- BrucePennington
----
CategoryPerson