ErikTheVikingSyndrome

"Extreme Programming projects do not try to produce a detailed requirements document and then freeze it.
Instead, the Onsite Customer is actively encouraged to steer the project by changing his mind about what exactly it is that the team is supposed to deliver."
(http://dustyvolumes.com/archives/605)

Agile programmers understand that business stakeholders will always have EmergentRequirements. 

But have you noticed that your Burn Down Charts burn up for days, perhaps weeks before they peak and burn down?

Have you noticed that when one Emergent Requirement is identified within moments there's a run of issues and ideas?

You've got ErikTheVikingSyndrome.


	Suddenly Erik notices Sven's father climbing aboard.

ERIK		What are YOU doing here?

SVEN'S DAD	You may need a real Berserk.

SVEN		I AM one, Dad!

ERIK		We haven't got a spare place.

IVAR		He can have my place. I don't want to go anyway.

ERIK		Well, you ARE!

KEITEL		Bjorn's not. He could have Bjorn's place.

ERIK		What's the matter with Bjorn?

THORFINN	Nothing... Halfdan the Black chopped his hand off last night.

ERIK		HE was lucky... (to Sven's dad) Sit there.

SNORRI		You can't have  Sven's  father  sitting  next  to Sven. They'll argue the whole time.

ERIK		That's true. (to Sven) YOU'D  better sit there. (to Sven's dad) You there, and Ornulf there.

SNORRI		Now you've got all the big ones on one side.

	Erik looks around. It is true that  all  the tall burly ones are on one	side.

ERIK		All right, you go there. You here...

	Sven's dad and Ornulf swap places.

SVEN'S DAD	Ohh! I wanted to sit next to Leif.

ERIK		Shut up. You there. You there and you there.

	Ivar and Ornulf swap places. Erik surveys this re-arrangement.

ERIK		That's better.

SNORRI		Now you've got all the ones with beards on one side and all the moustaches on the other.

	This is true. Erik thinks some moments and then:

ERIK		It doesn't matter.


- DavidCasey

----
''Nailed it! Right on the 'ead bruth'uh!''

