The Wiki unsystem is a fully functioning anarchy of ideas. Order is naturally occurring in chaos. 

----
The ErisApple is a golden apple bearing the word ''Kallisti'' (which means "the prettiest one")

as seen in TheIlluminatusTrilogy by Robert Shea and RobertAntonWilson

----
The original story is that the Olympian deities were having a big party, and didn't invite Eris (the goddess of discord) because she always, well, brought discord.  And that's a real party-killer.

Eris was upset about not being invited, so she created a golden apple which had the words "for the prettiest one" inscribed on it, and tossed it into the midst of the party.

Three other goddesses -- I think they were Aphrodite, Athena, and Hera -- all wanted the apple, because each of them thought that she was the prettiest one and therefore deserved the apple.  Eventually, to settle the argument, they went to a cute mortal guy (Paris, IIRC) to have him judge which one should get the apple.  Being Olympian deities, each of the goddesses wanted to bias the mortal guy in her direction, so they each sneakily appeared to Paris and offered him something.

I remember that Aphrodite offered him the most beautiful woman in the world; and Athena offered him wisdom, but I don't recall what Hera offered.  Maybe power or money or something.  It doesn't much matter, because Paris (being a young and testosterone-laden man) picked Aphrodite.

Aphrodite, being moderately honourable, promptly grabbed Helen of Troy and brought her to Paris.  The Trojan War erupted as a direct result of Helen's disappearance.

----
The Paratheo-anametamystikhood of Eris Esoteric (POEE), who draw their teachings from the Principia Discordia, refer to the exclusion of Eris from the Olympians' party as "The Original Snub", and state that after tossing the golden apple of discord into the midst of the other gods and goddesses, Eris went off by herself and joyously partook of a hot dog.

Members of the Discordian faith are enjoined to joyously partake of a hot dog on Friday as a religious observance. Which naturally puts their guts in an uproar.
