My apologies to any that this may offend.  My intention only is humour!

Twelve steps to ExtremeProgramming:
	1 We admitted we were powerless over heavy processes - that our projects had become unmanageable.
	1 We came to believe that an AgileProcess could restore us to sanity.
	1 Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of code as we understood it.
	1 Made a searching and fearless refactoring of our code.
	1 Admitted to our manager, to ourselves and to our pairing partner the exact nature of our wrongs.
	1 Were entirely ready to not integrate until our defects of code were removed.
	1 Humbly asked our PairProgramming partner to ReFactor our code.
	1 Made a list of all the objects we had written, and became willing to refactor them all.
	1 Made direct refactoring of such code wherever possible, except when to do so would injure it or others.
	1 Continued to write UnitTest''''''s and when we were wrong promptly admitted it.
	1 Sought through testing and listening to improve our conscious contact with our code, praying only for a green bar and the power to factor out redundancy.
	1 Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of attaining agility, we tried to carry this message to programmers and to practice these principles in all our projects.

-- DaveRooney


----
Twelve Steps of TDD as posted by Bob Flanders at eXtreme Programming yahoo group

	1 We admitted we were powerless over things we believed worked as expected, and that our systems had become unmanageable and untestable.
	2 Came to believe that a new testing process greater than our usual process could restore us to sanity.
	3 Made a decision to turn our testing process over to a Higher Power we understood to be Test Driven Development.
	4 Made a searching and fearless set of test our developing software must satisfy.
	5 Admitted to our Higher Power, to ourselves, and to another human who we pair with the exact nature of our wrongs - our test run red.
	6 Were entirely ready to have our pairing partner oversee our removing all these defects of the software.
	7 Humbly asked our Higher Power to regularly check that our software shortcomings remain removed.
	8 Made a list of all the known defects, wrote tests for them, and became willing to make them all run green.
	9 Refactored code wherever possible, except when to do so would cause tests to run red.
	0 Continued to run tests and when they run red, promptly admitted it and got them back to green.
	1 Sought through reading and research to improve our testing strategy, seeking for better ways to carry that out.
	2 Having had a realization of better systems as a result of these Steps, we tried to carry this message to other developers who feel stuck; and to practice these principles in all our future projects.


The Serenity Prayer

    God grant me the serenity
    to leave untested things I cannot test; 
    courage to test the things I can; 
    and wisdom to know when to refactor.