Here are some cryptic notes from my reading of Marianne Torbert's "Follow Me"

Cross Over (p6)
Form a large circle.  On a signal everyone must try to cross through the circle to the other side without touching anyone else.

Cows and Ducks (p7)
Leader whispers "cow" or "duck" into each player's ear.  They close their eyes and begin making the appropriate animal sound.  Like animals try to find each other.

Detective (p34)
The detective leaves the room.  One person is chosen as criminal, and everyone else copies their movement.  The criminal changes the movement every now and again.  After some practice, the detective comes in and must find the criminal in three guesses.

Birds fly (p38)
All stand.  A leader is selected, and names objects quickly.  For ones that fly the other players flap their arms; for the rest they fold them over their chests.  Anyone flapping when they shouldn't sits down and continues from that position.

Crows and Cranes (p49)
Divide players into two lines facing each other.  One is designated crows, the other cranes.  There is a safe zone behind each line.  The leader says "CR..OWS"/"CR..ANES" and those in the line called become taggers as the others try to reach their safe zone.  Taggers and tagged form a new line and the game continues.

Tiger, Tiger (p56)
Four players are tigers.  Everyone else closes their eyes and the leader positions the tigers.  Then the leader says "Tiger, tiger, where's the tiger", and points to one tiger, who roars.  Players point to the tiger and open their eyes.  The tiger raises its hand.

I am a Balloon (p66)
"You are a great saggy balloon and have no air in you".  Leader leads inflating/deflating fantasy as players move.

Lion Hunt (p70)
Leader tells story.  Players repeat each sentence and copy movement - either slapping thigh or something appropriate.  Begin "Let's go on a lion hunt", slapping thighs.

Frantic Ball (p78)
All players start with a ball on the floor in front of them.  The object is to keep all balls moving.  If one stops the leader signals and a point is lost.  After five points lost the game stops.  Stopped balls are started again - stuck balls are started by the leader.

ZZZZZ (p88)
The players pretend to be asleep.  The leader moves among them to see how relaxed they are.  At the sound of the alarm they jump up, move to somewhere else and pretend to go to sleep there.

Old Witchy-Toe Tag (p90)
	Group	Old Witchy-Toe, what are you looking for?
	Witchy-Toe	A needle
	Group	What do you need a needle for?
	Witchy-Toe	To mend my sack
	Group	What do you want a sack for?
	Witchy-Toe	To put YOU in!
at which the group scatters while the witch tries to catch someone.  That person becomes Witchy-Toe and the game continues.

Safe from the Sharks (p92)
Divide players into groups of three, plus some sharks.  In a three one is a diver in a cage formed by the other two holding hands.  On "change cages" the cage players lift their hands and all divers scurry for another cage.  Sharks tag divers, and the two change places.  Give each person a chance to be a diver.

Weather Walks (p110)
Have children dramatise all forms of weather by walking as if they are feeling it.  The leader may tell a story.

Line Tag (p119)
Players stand shoulder to shoulder in a line and count off by twos.  All number ones turn and face the other direction.  The player at one end becomes it, and chases the player at the other end.  All the other players remain in line, but if the chaser tags someone on the back he takes their place as they become it.

Robot (p151)
Pair up.  One partner closes eyes and is the robot.  The other tells the robot how to move in order to achieve some objective.

Wave the Ocean (p155)
Place chairs in a close circle with one empty.  When the leader calls "flow right" the player with that chair on their right slides into it and each player follows.  Similarly for "flow left".  The object is to flow smoothly.

Car and Driver (p160)
Pair up.  The car shuts his eyes and the driver stands behind him with his hands on the car's shoulders.  Then drivers do some task.  No talking - control  by touch only!

Ping-Pong Blow (p177)
Players lie on their stomachs in two lines facing each other.  Their hands are placed under their chins and their elbows are extended to their sides, forming a straight line with teammates.  A ball is placed between the two lines and each team tries to blow it so that it crosses the opponents' line or touches an opponent.  Alternatives include playing on a table, chins on table.

BruceAnderson 19970120

----
CategoryGamesandIcebreakers