''As a sandbox, fine. Please, not as an advertisement.'' [This page has been dormant for at least two years.]
----
Freshpond Education is using this area to experiment with an internal conversation about knowledge management and experiment with the idea of using the wiki paradigm within our own web tool http://www.freshpond.net.

We recognize the public nature of the wikiweb and we welcome your comments, but please, identify yourself if you are not a member of FreshPond.
----
We are reading the article "Knowledge Management in Education: Defining the Landscape" by Petrides and Nodine. 
	* http://www.kmcluster.com/Winter_2002_Agenda.htm (Broken Link)

	* The monograph is available in PDF format here: http://iskme.path.net/kmeducation.pdf

	* Note that the page numbers in the page footers don't match the page numbers of the PDF file viewer... when referring to a page, use the number in the page footer.

	* The following is a list of our collective notes. See http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?TextFormattingRules for editing tips.
----
'''Data, information, knowledge''' (pg 13)

We should be using Take 5 and Freshpond.net to better manage the entire data, information, knowledge continuum.
	1. Lessons fit into the "knowledge" part of the continuum, but there is much more we can do.
	1. Can we strengthen the link to student data? Maybe make it more overt in the curriculum challenge process?
	1. We need to do more overt training on how best to harness the power of Freshpond.net and our clients' own data systems.

I like the idea of our Design Teams being the agents of converting '''data''' from measuring student learning into '''information''' about what needs to be improved and using our Take 5 Process to generate lessons, reflections, and other '''knowledge''' about how to improve learning.

'''Maintain a focus on people and their needs''' (page 25)

The article validates the need for collaboration and overt processes (i.e Take 5) for managing discussions (see page 9). People and their skills, culture, management process, interactions, etc. are the key to harnessing the power of the technology.

The strength of the Design Team Program is clearly the collegial reflective work that is part of the Take 5 process and the power of Freshpond.net to keeps teams focused and on task between meetings.

Have we emphasized enough the recruitment of excellent people and the support of less-than-excellent people. See graph on page 11.

'''Start Small'''

Article validates our pilot approach. I'm glad we are not in the CSR or "whole faculty" game.

----

We could also organize our notes around the list on page 17

	1. Build on vocab and practices of the organizational context
	1. Focus on people and their needs, go where the energy is
	1. Make explicit the work processes and patterns of information flow
	1. Make sure technology is on board, but do not let it steer the ship
	1. Improve student learning and outcomes: don't settle for procedural tinkering
	1. Expect an iterative process that endures over time
	1. Consider larger picture

----
Category OffTopic