GodTube.com is a dynamic community of people who are looking to connect, share, and belong. In its simplest form, GodTube is a video-driven social network where users can explore their faith and the tenets of Christianity.

Our millions of users come back time and time again to find inspiration, ask questions, interact, chat, share, upload Christian videos, worship and more. Some of the content is fun, some of it is serious, and all of it is safe for the whole family. GodTube showcases religious content from many of the world's leading Christian ministries and socially responsible faith-based organizations, including Spanish language and other international Christian ministries.

Representing Baptist, Catholic, Episcopal, Evangelical, Messianic, Methodist and all of the traditional Christian denominations, GodTube is unique in its appeal and in its mission to "Broadcast Him".

Security and moral integrity are exceptionally important to the family at GodTube, and we take great pains to protect you and your loved ones. GodTube is family-friendly and is great for all Christians alike, including Christian children, Christian teens and Christian Youth. And Bible study, prayer groups, student ministries and missions videos are among our popular activities for Christian kids of all ages.

Whether you are watching a video, using a video blog, participating in a chat room, posting a prayer on our Prayer Wall, reading Bible verses from our Virtual & online Bible or exploring a channel or Ministry Group, our goal is to provide you the best and most touching in user-generated and professionally produced Christian video programming.

For this reason, GodTube provides live video broadcasts of our many partner pastors and ministries, as well as live chat, Christian movies, Christian music, Children's Christian videos, Christian hip hop, Christian rock music videos as well as Christian video sharing.

Praise and share your love of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Christian Church and the Gospel on GodTube.com, the largest online community for all Christians and those seeking a Christian perspective.

GodTube, also known as "God Tube" or "God's YouTube," and GodTube's videos can be found the world over.

----

Not to be confused with http://youvebeenleftbehind.com/index-3.html , part of the pseudo-Christian movement to accelerate the Final Days by causing a World War.

* The unsaved will be 'left behind' on earth to go through the "tribulation period" after the "Rapture". You remember how, for a short time, after (9/11/01) people were open to spiritual things and answers. (We are still singing "God Bless America" at baseballs' seventh inning stretch.) Imagine how taken back they will be by the millions of missing Christians and devastation at the rapture. They will know it was true and that they have blown it. There will be a small window of time where they might be reached for the Kingdom of God. We have made it possible for you to send them a letter of love and a plea to receive Christ one last time. You can also send information based on scripture as to what will happen next. Each fulfilled prophecy will cause your letter and plea to be remembered and a decision to be made. 

* "WHY" is one last chance to bring them to Christ and snatch them from the flames!  

This is a social networking site and service, dedicated to registering your parting e-mails, to be sent to your friends and family if you are taken up, and they are "Left Behind".

The real Christian religion should distance from, and debunk, these self-destructive belief systems. --PhlIp

----
Not that I'm a believer in Rapture theology (it's a very recent, nineteenth century, invention: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Nelson_Darby and I believe it's a huge distortion ) -- but people I know who do believe in this emphatically DO NOT believe in 'accelerating the Final Days by starting a World War'. This is a deep misrepresentation (verging on blood libel) and is not helpful in untangling this issue. What they do believe is a sort of fatalism with regard to war as an unavoidable part of human nature, combined with a deep suspicion of self-appointed global 'peacemakers' as cynical power-mongers. Paranoid fear of a 'global one-world government conspiracy' feeds into this milieu and reinforces it (as it does libertarians and anarchists, for different but overlapping reasons to do with overoptimistic faith in self-sufficiency and distrust of outside influences 'telling me what to do').

In practice this belief system may lead to an apparent enthusiasm for war and support for nationalist, often loudly  religious, agendas and blindness to the danger of militaristic demagogues and a sort of passive-aggressive hostility toward international peacemaking efforts, and I strongly disagree with it - but it's not actually a *desire* for war as such, and it is most certainly not some kind of blind hateful desire to destroy the entire world to hasten the apocalypse (any more than Islamic fundamentalist politics is driven by a literal desire for 'seven virgins in paradise'). Claiming it as such is not helpful.
--NateCull

You are very forgiving of people like Erik Prince...

'The former employee also alleges that Prince "views himself as a Christian crusader tasked with eliminating Muslims and the Islamic faith from the globe," and that Prince's companies "encouraged and rewarded the destruction of Iraqi life."'

  Blackwater Founder Implicated in Murder
  http://www.thenation.com/doc/20090817/scahill

----

''or Sarah Palin''

http://www.librarian.net/stax/2366/sarah-palin-vp-nominee/

''"[Former Wasilla mayor] Stein says that as mayor, Palin continued to inject religious beliefs into her policy at times. “She asked the library how she could go about banning books,” he says, because some voters thought they had inappropriate language in them. “The librarian was aghast.” The librarian, Mary Ellen Baker, couldn’t be reached for comment, but news reports from the time show that Palin had threatened to fire her for not giving “full support” to the mayor."''

''And you thought Cheney was a fun VP...''