If GregBredbeck is gonna contribute material such as

* "I recently taught a course on hypertext theory to English majors at U.C. Riverside, and one key distinction I labored over with them was the distinction between annotation and generation."
then he should have a page, I think. -- BenTremblay

----

I am an Associate Professor of English at the University of California, Riverside. In the last five years or so I have been undergoing a tremendous shift in my research interests, and have been re-educating myself in the field of digital media and cyber-theory. (My oringinal fields were Englsh Renaissance Culture and Lesbian and Gay Studies). This is my first foray into wiki participation, though I have been studying them from an anthropological viewpoint for quite a while now. I was motivated to join in the discussion by the overall high quality of thought that C2 seems to enjoy.

I am working on an extended philosophical project about anthropomorphism and interface, and hope to become a more active part of the wiki world so as to add experiential  knowledge to what has so far been a rather theoretical endeavor. 

Thank you for showing an interest in my comment. I took my website down for the summer so I could redesign it and update it, but when I get it up and running again, I will post a notice so you can see more of the issues that interest me.

----
If you`re interested, we would be pleased to receive a commentar to the anthropomorhism and -centrism in the TheLibraryOfBabel by Borges (see also Babelfish), a example for the Gutenberg-Galaxy (McLuhan-book title). A complementary science fiction approach to the informationscience (hardware of books) is the computer approach to the Turing-Galaxy in the Hitchhiker`s Guide by Douglas Adams , where computers are in the center of the universe, seeking the ultimate answer to everything(see GeoffFourtytwo). These chapters are highlights of the book, I think. See also `Google calculator to the ultimate answer` on the net.
 
The holographic universe is also another publication of interest, with consequences  in the `Giant awakes` - if i can recall - where an gigantic virtual organism arises to power on earth. Other interesting keywords to search for are songlines of noosphere , point omega, LovelaceTest- the smooth and charming test of Lord Byron`s daughter LadyLovelace, which will be of more actual interest than the Turing Test. 

Could Finnegans Wake or its german pendant Zettel`s Traum be literary metaphors for the hypertext ?

The Ghost in the Machine by Arthur Koestler is a little bit rudimentary but readable. 
----
CategoryHomePage