In this wiki, they always seem to be hilarious.. the opposing view or the alternative view.. the one who comes in and turns the tables, or the one who adds a slant to the topic at hand. Or even if the italics agree with the non italic text, they are still hilarious. They remind of a frail old man who can't use his pen properly and jiggles it and shakes while scheming up his reply, but still has very sharp mind regardless.

''That's correct.''

Maybe you need a higher-resolution display.  On my 1680x1050 display with anti-aliased fonts, italics don't look jiggly or shaky at all.

''Or a Mac with "Light" font smoothing, even at 1024x768. Beeeautiful.''

Both/three/whoever the hell of you have destroyed this page.

''So?  Fix it.''

Can't fight with italic, they are very clever.

''I resemble that remark!''

Sir or madam,  when replying, could you please hold your pencil with some fine rotary muscle control? Thank you.

''Is this better?  I typed it very carefully.''

Your keyboard or pencil is most likely crooked. Please take your keyboard and ''all your pencils'' (not just the one you used that time) into an alignment shop that uses high quality lasers, and have them checked thoroughly. 

''big monitor? increase FireFox font, like me''

I can see the obnoxious text of yours just fine, you ''creep''. It's the way you ''twist'' and ''slant'' words in your direction --> over there. Sly, very sly. In fact, you are probably ''<--'' over there and not ''-->'' over there since you are so sly and deceiving.  Next thing will be your words will start sliding down the screen and falling off it. You are just out to play game aren't you? You really do want to harm people with your tricks and distortions? Do you have any idea what you are doing to people?
*''The words don't slant --> that way.  They just look like that when I pull the rug underneath them <-- this way.''

''Yes.  Oh, '''yes'''.''

And what about me? I'm sly too and not slanting anything!