First edition (in 1998): Just looking around ...and being very interested by Wiki.
I think that I will try to clone it although I'm against all forms of human cloning. But Wiki's an artifact, isn't she?

Well, I've done it: it runs on NT4/Apache. I've called it AgorIcom (see below). Presently, the traffic is very low and I need to find ways to make it more popular.

Jean-Michel André
IcomInformatique
Charenton - France 

Edited on December 29, 2003: in 2000, I joined Elsevier France (http://www.elsevier.fr or http://www.elsevier.com), the french subsidiary of the world-wide publisher in STM (Science, Techniques, Medicine) and legal areas Reed-Elsevier. I had the position of Internet and Multimedia Technical Manager and my main responsibility was to pilot the design, the development and the operation of web portals with full text scientific documents for doctors (http://www.emc-consulte.com) and biologists (http://www.bio-consulte.com). The portal interface is in French, Spanish and Italian and the content is mainly in French (with a few journals in English). These portals are complementary to other portals in English developed by Reed-Elsevier (e.g. ScienceDirect and MDConsult.com). 

The underlying infrastructure is a service-oriented platform called Pleiades. It relies upon Java, XML and SQL and communicates with other platforms and ERP over Internet. Verity K2 is used as a search engine.

A web site for the French "Académie des Sciences" has also been built upon this platform.

Edited on November 24, 2006: I am now in the procress of creating my own business around web services for french readers. I have built a web site called "L'agora des livres" (http://www.agoradeslivres.com). It takes much of the spirit and technologies of "web 2.0" and "social networks" to let the french reader community speak about their love of books.

Technically, the site has been build with PHP/MySQL and integrates the well-known PHPBB forum software for the discussions between members. A tight integration has been made between the "book part" of the site and phpBB.  

Edited on September 01, 2011: its's fun to see that this good old wiki is still up. Time has flown... "L'agora des livres" (http://www.agoradeslivres.com) is still up too, but I run it for my pleasure and the pleasure of its ~1600 users/fans. I am now the CTO of Infolegale, an IT and BI start-up in the domain of B2B information. My daily work is a mix between design, programming, and project management. That's fun ! I'm interested in lean management philosophy applied to software engineering.
----
CategoryHomePage