High Priest of Harmful Matter !  ex DeadKennedys singer, now with the mighty Lard.  Amazing political speaker.  Think NoamChomsky with a sense of humour.

[Lard - Industrial style band formed by JelloBiafra (Dead Kennedys) and Al Jourgenson (Ministry).]

''Much to his surprise, Jello Biafra was nominated for the Green Party Presidential Primary in New York State.  Biafra, former lead singer/songwriter of the seminal political punk band Dead Kennedys, accomplished spoken word performer, and renowned social commentator, will be an official candidate in the March 7 election.  Also on the ballot are consumer advocate Ralph Nader, Stephen Gaskin, founder of The Farm - a commune in Tennessee, and Joel Kovel, a doctor, peace activist, and college professor.''

''No stranger to politics, Jello Biafra ran against Diane Feinstein in the 1979 San Francisco Mayoral race, where he finished in fourth place with over six thousand votes (3.5% of the total).  In June 1986, criminal charges for "Distribution of Harmful Matter to Minors" against Dead Kennedys' Frankenchrist album thrust Biafra into the spotlight as a spokesperson on First Amendment rights.   It marked the first case in history to try a recorded work for obscenity.  The trial ended in a hung jury and the judge ultimately dismissed the case.''

''Biafra joined forces with other concerned musicians, including Frank Zappa, to combat the PMRC (Parent's Music Resource Center), an organization dedicated to forcing the de-facto censorship of musical lyrics.  Biafra locked horns with PMRC leader Tipper Gore twice on the Oprah Winfrey Show; he has also appeared on Donahue, Crossfire, and Politically Incorrect.  After numerous musical and spoken word albums, Biafra continues to perform internationally, stirring his fans with scathing political insights paired with razor sharp wit.''

''Biafra is owner/founder of Alternative Tentacles Records, a respected independent label.  ATR recently celebrated its twentieth anniversary, and boasts more than two hundred, often controversial, releases to date.''

''Jello Biafra, a registered Green Party member in California for several years, has chosen Mumia Abu-Jamal, an award-winning journalist currently in prison on death row, as his vice-presidential running mate.  This decision will focus attention on Abu-Jamal's case and on opposition towards the DeathPenalty in general.''

http://www.alternativetentacles.com/page.gsp?id=pr20000124

--AlanFrancis

----

I take my Jello in only the tiniest spoonfuls; each one is very good for me.

    You'r a star-belly sneech
    You suck like a leech
    You want everyone to act like you
    Kiss ass while you bitch so you can get rich
    But'cher boss is gettin' richer off you

--PhlIp

----

Download a speech of his here :  http://www.cs.rose-hulman.edu/~holzknkj/jello/

--ender [holzknkj@hushmail.com]

