http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/

Those of us who think of PatternsAsMemes should consider contributing to this new journal. -- WardCunningham

--------

''From the introduction ...''

The Journal of memetics is a new peer-reviewed academic journal. The editors feel that a journal on memetics can be an
important place for scientists and professionals to discuss their views and research in memetics. The first issue is scheduled for
May 1997. The journal will be published on the Internet without subscription fee.



The journal of memetics seeks to develop the memetic perspective, with space devoted to relevant evolutionary issues and
other related topics. We seek to discuss issues concerning memetics such as:

	* Mechanisms involved in evolutionary processes. Comparisons of different models of evolution are especially welcome. 
	* Philosophical or theoretical issues concerning epistemology and evolution 
	* Boundaries of the evolutionary approach 
	* Empirical research 
	* Fundamental approaches aiming at structuring the field of memetics as a science 

...
In 1976, RichardDawkins invented the word ''meme,''
defining it as ''the new replicator'',
''a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation''. 
The initial description of ''meme'' by Dawkins is rather vague, as he admits himself,
which is a possible reason for current diverging views on what a meme really is, and how the memetic model can
be used. We are confronted with an avalanche of books, essays, and publications scattered over different
journals and disciplines, with dialogue flashing up here and there in an unstructured manner. Many dialogues
disappear after only a brief lifespan. This chaos exists because a general framework is lacking. 

...
The memetic view provides a powerful framework to compare and connect what appears at first sight to be very
different processes in different disciplines. Since the editors feel that memetics may prove to be useful and
clarifying, we decided - after thorough discussion - on naming this journal the ''Journal of Memetics'', complying
with the hope of DouglasHofstadter that this field of inquiry should be called memetics. 
Because of the current
vagueness of the concept meme, a subtitle of the Journal was needed. ''Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission'', briefly EMIT, was selected by the editors as the most informative summary with regard to the field
of interest to be covered by the journal. This subtitle expresses our view that memetics is connected to the
broader paradigm of evolutionary studies in human, computer and biological sciences.

-----

For a dissenting view, see MemesShmemes

----
CategoryMagazine
