Following items were moved from JustaProgrammer so as not to over-clutter that page:

From Computer Weekly in the UK (http://www.computerweekly.com/cwarchive/news/20000113/cwcontainer.asp?name=B1.html):

''The use of the word architect to describe IT professionals specializing in putting systems together is causing a stir in the building architect community. The Architect Registration Board (ARB) has said it has received a number of complaints from registered architects over use of the word "architect" in IT-related job vacancies.''

''Alan Peacock, regulation executive at the ARB, said, "The title architect is protected under the Architect's Act 1997 and technically using it [in IT job vacancies] is in breach of the Act." Peacock said that, outside the construction industry, "architect" could be used as a job title in only three instances - to refer to a naval, landscape or golf-course architect.''
----

You can call yourself an architect, or naval architect, or landscape architect or golf-course architect but you can not call yourself an IT architect? Pure rubbish! Says so much more about the ARB then it does about the term architect.
-- DaveSteffe 

''Maybe it'll be the only time, but I'm with ARB on this one!''

Why do they choose to leave ''naval, landscape and golf-course architects,'' as unrestricted but they insist on controlling ''SYSTEMS architect, IT architect,'' etc? Is it a status issue? -- DaveSteffe

''Quite right it's a 'status issue!!! After 5 years college, 2 years 'office apprenticeship', loads of years learning from your mistakes, major long-term product liability and a hefty PII annual premium !!!''

''However, the really fun part is that in the UK its only the '''title''' that's protected! The 'function' (designing buildings etc) is wide open: anyone can and does legally do it. Of course the realities of Professional Liability Insurance curtail some non-professional folk carrying out the role for some public/commercial bodies. But, take housing design for example: only a very small percentage of all new housing is 'architect-designed' compared with European countries.''
''By contrast several countries legally protect the 'function' of building designers (whether 'architects' or 'engineers') but have varied titles in use.''
''Somehow when I worked in the Arabian/Persian Gulf my job title was 'Senior Architect/Engineer'!''

-- MartinNoutch

<< I'm sure many ''Systems and IT'' Architects have a similar amount invested in their careers. How does '''SYSTEMS''' and '''IT''' preceding '''ARCHITECT'''
degrade your professional status, but '''naval architect''', or '''landscape architect''' or '''golf-course architect''' does not? I'll stir it up ..... is it really class rather than status? -- DaveSteffe

''You can call yourself an architect, or naval architect, or landscape architect or golf-course architect but you can not call yourself an IT architect? Pure rubbish!!''

I'm with you on this one. Golf Course Architect? Come on!! Why is that so special but Software is not? Am I missing something? There are tons of post-graduate studies in SoftwareArchitecture, so I'd rather not here a response about the amount of school one must attend. Maybe the answer to every trade in the world is certification and bonding. Ugh!!

''My 'status issue' comment above was not totally serious. However, I've got no idea how golf-course 'architects' managed to creep within the boundaries!!''
''The problem, of course, is that if the historically understood title is used in any and every way it ceases to have any meaning, as noted on ArchitectingWord''
''What about 'Interior Architect' (a serious contender), 'Double-Glazing Architect', 'Second-Hand Car Architect', 'Automobile Architect'?''

''Can anyone out there in the States comment for/from/with knowledge of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) view on this?'' -- MartinNoutch

According to http://www.arb.org.uk/regs/prot.html the ARB only really get fussed when the person is engaged in a "practice or business related to architecture" - such as Arbitration, Building Contracting, Building Services Engineering, Conservation, Expert Witness, Interior Design, Project Management, Space Planning, Structural Engineering, Surveying. 

One has to respect their concerns about architecture's reputation. If they get pissy just because their title has crept into use in another industry, though, let them sue the English language. -- ColJac