Karl Heinrich Marx, revolutionary, sociologist, historian, economist'', theologian and philosopher''. 

http://www.appstate.edu/~stanovskydj/images/marx.gif

born May 5, 1818, Trier, Rhine province, Prussia [Germany] 
died March 14, 1883, London 

Co-author of ''Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei'', (commonly known as ''The Communist Manifesto''), author of ''Das Kapital'' and a large number of other works, many of which, despite being written in the 1800s, have only been published and become widely available since the 1960s and 70s such as the Paris Manuscripts and the Grundrisse.

----
See ISBN 0060916575 for good biography of Marx and other outstanding "intellectuals"

''"Conservative historian Paul Johnson wears his ideology proudly on his sleeve in this often ruthless dissection of the thinkers and artists who (in his view) have shaped modern Western culture [...]"''

''There are probably better sources to find out more about Marx than Johnson's character assassinations of historical intellectuals.''

----
Why do you call Marx revolutionary?

''I would understand that. But why do they call him sociologist, historian or economist?'' [Because he was all three?]
----
TheoVerelst  I recently was at the belgium http://www.fosdem.org (Universitee libre de Brusselles) conference on open source software, where in Tcl/Tk developers room there was this writing on the wall next to all speakers (including me):

http://82.168.209.239/fosdem/DSC03268b1m.jpg A page by me: http://82.168.209.239/fosdem

That's probably along the lines of the cult like popularity of the Maxist leftwingers for instance around the sixties and in more or less intellectual circles. 

I heared that Marx himself was sponsored by (real) illuminati circuits making his strugle against the establishment rather schizofrenic, but it is still valid of course to observer that certain rich people want to own the productions goods which in mass production can in the longer run produce more riches and otherwise unobtainable goods than what the rich could pay for, and give power over many areas of life away to masses of more average people.

An interesting tought when mircosoft sources are leaking..
