http://www.solipsys.co.uk/C2/KathyBracy.jpg

*kathybracy@gmail.com

http://loveisaverb.blogspot.com/

http://www.linkedin.com/in/quickbookkeeping

----
07/07/2010: Hey Guys!....Just stoppin by to say hi & see if any of the "old guys" are around. 
Wondering if some people are still being douche bags, or if things have settled down at all in the last few years!
Hope everyone is well & life is treating you good! -KathyB   

----


Recent Conversations:

The above may be deleted after a few months, or sooner if you like. -- Anon]

Also... I have noticed that recent changes used to have I think it was seven (or possibly five) days of Recent Changes...that has changed also. -- KathyBracy

I don't recall it ever being seven; it may have been five some time ago. If it's vandalized, restoration is easier if it covers only four days. -- Anon

''See what I mean? Anon deleted our little conversation here. He'll probably delete this comment, too. It's his Wiki for now, but we're rebelling on all fronts.'' -- DaveVoorhis '''UGH''' --KathyBracy

Anon..EXCUSE ME....Here is one very basic but VERY important thing to me that I have learned coming to this Wiki, for well over 6 years...This is MY NamePage...PLEASE do not delete, refactor, or eliminate ANYTHING on my NamePage. I would like the opportunity to do that myself. While I understand that you have taken it upon yourself to become the Wiki Moderator and help keep this wiki in good form, I would SO APPRECIATE, if you would allow me to have my NamePage to do the things that HELP ME to learn, test, try, refactor, and other things without having someone come along and delete it, before I have the opportunity to do what I would like to do.
Thank You for your understanding! -– KathyBracy

I removed it because it was misleading, being based on a misinterpretation of something I wrote which I had changed, and I knew you had read what I removed. -- Anon

Anon, Actually I did read it, but that's not the POINT. I would really appreciate it greatly if you would allow me to refactor my NamePage, for the reasons I stated above. Everything I do on here is a learning experience for me, so it helps me to do the deleting, refactoring, etc. Thank You! -- KathyBracy

Remember the days when ''I'' was thought of as a pain!....This whole Anon thing is just CRAZY! Makes me not feel so bad about 6 years ago! -- KathyBracy

The crazy thing is that Wiki works best when everyone '''avoids''' being possessive. 

''Detail on the above sentence and a possible example would be awesome.'' -- KathyBracy

When there's mutual acceptance that what's written is information given away and no longer owned, debate over how the medium is used soon reduces to a consensus that is highly tolerant, allowing all but the most emotive issues to be discussed peaceably.

''Great Example, Thank You.''

----

'''Life is not a journey to the grave with the intention of arriving safely in a pretty and well preserved body, but rather to skid in broadside, thoroughly used up, totally worn out, and loudly proclaiming ... WOW! What a Ride!'''

----

'''Some Pages I have Created'''
	*TheMeaningOfRealLife
	*StGem
	*BiasOrPrejudice
	*Jesus''''''Christ
	*ProFreedom
	*ElephantOnTheCoffeeTable
----
Loved TheMeaningOfRealLife, Kathy!  I heard a saying along those lines: "You cannot be fully loved, until you are fully known." -- BrucePennington

Thank You Bruce!!! I really enjoyed writing it, as my heart was very full at that time! I have written or am working on another piece right now but am still playing with it as it's not as good as I would like it. --KathyBracy
----
1 Corinthians 13: 1 - 13

1 Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I have become sounding brass or a clanging cymbal. 2 And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, but have not love, I am nothing. 3 And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, but have not love, it profits me nothing.

4 Love suffers long and is kind; love does not envy; love does not parade itself, is not puffed up; 5 does not behave rudely, does not seek its own, is not provoked, thinks no evil; 6 does not rejoice in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth; 7 bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. 

8 Love never fails. But whether there are prophecies, they will fail; whether there are tongues, they will cease; whether there is knowledge, it will vanish away. 9 For we know in part and we prophesy in part. 10 But when that which is perfect has come, then that which is in part will be done away. 11 When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. 12 For now we see in a mirror, dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then I shall know just as I also am known. 13 And now abide faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest of these is love. 

----
I have 2 favorite new quotes: 

''The main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing. AND...the main thing is...I Am Safe, I Am Loved & I Am Happy!''

''and the day came when the risk to remain tight in a bud was more painful than it took to blossom'' 

----
'''My Favorite Wiki Quotes:'''

''It matters not to me whether we agree, what matters more "to me", is the relationship between the people I have encountered.''

''The person with whom you are having the discussion is more important than the discussion itself.''

''From St. Francis of Assisi. Here is a paraphrase: 'Go, and spread the Gospel. Use words if necessary'.''

----
'''The Nice Things People Say:'''

I miss the poem. Whether you decide to stay or go, I hope you will put your poem back. I thought it communicated the inner beauty of Christianity very well. -- WayneConrad

This poem is really wonderful. -- HelmutLeitner

Kathy, thanks for your comments on Julia Roberts. -- WaldenMathews

If nothing else, wiki is about ideas and opinions. Maybe, '''PLEASE note this is just a simple WikiThicky'''''''s opinion''', your writing style may be interpreted by some as aggressive, but I'm as certain as I can be from ''this distance'' that you are not an aggressive individual, devoted and committed for certain, but not aggressive. -- DaveSteffe
----
'''September 22,2000'''

For the last 2 months or so, I have been coming to wiki and have noticed that a lot say that this site is for programming ideas. Others say it is for that and many other things. ''Quite confusing!'' WardCunningham seems to be a name that is used a lot around here yet I only see "Him" use it a few times. The funny thing is that he used it yesterday on the page titled IsChristianityOnTopic. Ward didn't say anything, just let us know he was there. ''Made me laugh actually!!'' Is his silence approval, or is it disapproval? Does he like what this site has become or not? I actually don't think he is going to give up the information. I have emailed him to ask, just as many of you have. I bet he thinks it's not his job. That it's ours.

If the programmers who want this to be a site with just programming ideas on it have their way, it will indeed be a very boring site.

''(Maybe.)'' -- Okay, I'll let you have the maybe. But who is to say right? That is why I guess I am just hanging back. Waiting to see what you all are going to do with this wiki '''you''' have created.

If the programmers on here let other pages override the programming pages, this site will be a complete mess. So the balance is up to the people who contribute to this wiki! I have gone in and removed my name from 99% of my posts and ReFactor''''''ed some, so that it can be reworked And ReFactor''''''ed some more into what it should be, to add the balance necessary to make this a great document site.

To program a computer must be awesome. To try and program a human to act, write and think like a computer is pointless and would make them very boring people. The extraordinary people on here are extraordinary because of who they "are", not just what they know! I have gained so much wisdom, while being here and have had so much fun. I have met people who make my heart pound just a little harder. What an extraordinary thing that is! While you sit there at your computer, looking at the "words" on the screen, remember there is a young woman on the other side of it, trying to look past the words to see "you". I don't understand many of the programming pages, as I don't know "anything" about it. What I do care about is who is typing the words I see, when I do go to those pages.

I just don't know what to do, is my problem... Many have made it very clear that WardsWiki is for a very specific reason, and I will not continue to come here if it causes extraordinary people to come less. The balance will be gone if that happens, and I am not going to be one of the people to cause that. And I am tired of hearing about what is and isn't allowed here, because as I've come to realize, many of you don't know what is and isn't allowed here either! It's all been assumption, up to this point. I can't be who I am and not be a caring, emotional human being, so I will continue to sit back and watch the masterpiece unfold and see where I may fit, ''if at all'', into it. -- KathyBracy

''Very nice, Kathy, and I'm well aware of why you put it right here. Before you remove yourself and your gift from this community, push your powers of observation a bit and see whether anyone you fear you may be driving away has actually left, and whether your presence has actually forced that. -- WaldenMathews''

Thank you for saying such nice things! As I stated, I am just going to "observe" things, and see if I ''fit'' into the big picture. If we can't agree on whether my contribution is within the content of this site, then I will not stay. If the ''masterpiece'' does take what I contribute to become as such, I will contribute. I guess we shall see. Peace -- KathyBracy

Kathy, maybe a newcomer's opinion doesn't count, but: the Wiki needs you. Because: science explains phenomena by forces. So the big phenomenon of life must be thought to have a thriving force behind it (science doesn't name it, you name it). This force throws four projections into to human mind that may even be geometrically constructed: love, freedom, order and individuality. These may be considered forces of their own. There can be no life without all of these forces and some harmony between them. Even the Wiki (seen as something living) needs a balance between order (document mode, being on topic), individuality (thread mode), love (personal relationships) and freedom (talking about things one is really interested in, even off topic) to evolve. You actively contribute to that balance. Only those people endanger the Wiki that are writing about things they either don't know or don't love. Not you. -- HelmutLeitner

''Thank you HelmutLeitner. I'm still here, just sitting back and watching right now. But I haven't gone anywhere. I like you guys too much!!!''
----
Kathy, about your question on DiscussingVsProselytizing:
	* tongue in cheek -- with insincerity, irony, or whimsical exaggeration

The comment that you became a convert to Wiki is ironic in the light of your attempt to convert others to Christianity on Wiki. Among the intelligentsia of Wiki, blatant attempts to change someone's mind are frowned upon. Instead, one should logically put forth an explanation, and if others find it sufficiently compelling, they will change their own mind.

Thank You. Does my writing style make a person presume that I am trying to convert someone to something? I need to work on that! Or, is it maybe that because I am a Christian, people automatically assume I am trying to convert them? When does sharing and talking cease and evangelizing start? When does excitement and enthusiasm cease and an attempt at conversion start? Thanks for giving me more to self-analyze:-)! Here I go off on another self-discovery journey!!

As a Christian, people's perception of you is based not just upon your words and actions, but upon a tradition of evangelism practiced by some Christians. Some people, having been greatly annoyed by that tradition, may become annoyed by Christianity itself, even when it is not mentioned in an evangelical tone. I think it's a Pavlovian response, and pretty normal human behavior (although unfortunate for you). -- WayneConrad

''So is "Pavlovian response" an excuse for prejudice ;-)''
	
No. But I find it helpful to understand what makes people 'people'. -- WayneConrad

''Sometimes, explicit "god-talk" puts people off - and sometimes we can find other ways to express those ideas, especially with people we don't know well. People, even strangers, generally recognize genuine caring, respect, and love - one doesn't necessarily need to use trigger-words like "Jesus" in order to nevertheless live His ministry. Jesus said "Go and ''do'' likewise" (emphasis mine) - not "go and talk" (or feel, or think). I think the answer to your question ("When does sharing and talking cease and evangelizing start?") is when the person your conversing with becomes uncomfortable. If someone asks YOU about YOUR faith, by all means answer. Perhaps you might leave it at that for awhile. Jesus always left room for those he conversed with to come to their own conclusion, he always invited and never coerced, even in the face of extreme provocation. -- TomStambaugh''

True, I think my initial arrival set the tone for my reaction from people. I have done my penitence for that, and I think my words, and responses to pages since then, show the real person I am (I hope). The page I first responded to was a Christian page, so that's all I can say about that. I am learning!! Thank you for those wonderful words on the other page by the way. It's not my job to save, it's His. All I can hope to do is let Him be seen, through me. I do hope that since my initial arrival, people have come to know me and realize I am not doing anything other than sharing, and talking with passion, enthusiasm, and caring. 

''Kathy, I think if you follow on in the same vein as the existing content you will do fine. It is better if you read some of the wonderful pages linked from the StartingPoints, rather than my telling you what to do.''

----
Thank you very much, Kathy :-) I know a lot of Americans are supportive of Israel, and America as a country is our closet ally. These are hard times for us, as there are suicide attacks daily - there is no real way to prevent this; wherever you put guards, they can strike... Again, thank you. -- NissimHadar

It would be nice if we could keep KathyBracy as a discussion for and about Kathy. I'd rather think that there is room for everyone, and there is a place for everything, and when we have to make links to other things, then we could make them in a discreet manner.
---- 
Well Kathy there truely is a place for everything on Wiki but I wonder if you should consider that this wiki is not the same as all Wiki's. I have no problem with off topic pages myself, but consider that some may think that 
if is ok to be about everything then it is hard to be about any one thing. So in modertion not an issue, I do think that if, for example, this site would morph into a debate on the existance of G-d or his role in the life of a good christian, it might be hard for me to find a good discussion of strong  vs weak typing.  The key is moderation. And from what I see here on this page  I do not see a problem.

    Please stick around -- no real reason not to. And your kind of easy to look at too :)

MarcGrundfest

----
	 :	When I say..........I am a Christian
	 :	I'm not shouting "I'm saved",
	 :	I'm whispering "I get lost"
	 :	"That is why I chose this way."

	 :	When I say..........I am a Christian,
	 :	I'm not trying to be strong,
	 :	I'm professing that I am weak,
	 :	and pray for strength to carry on.

	 :	When I say..........I am a Christian,
	 :	I don't speak of this with pride.
	 :	I'm confessing that I stumble,
	 :	and need someone to be my guide.

	 :	When I say..........I am a Christian,
	 :	I'm not bragging of success.
	 :	I'm admitting I have failed,
	 :	and cannot ever pay the debt.

	 :	When I say..........I am a Christian,
	 :	I'm not claiming to be perfect.
	 :	My flaws are too visible,
	 :	but God believes I'm worth it.

	 :	When I say..........I am a Christian,
	 :	I still feel the sting of pain.
	 :	I have my share of heartaches,
	 :	which is why I seek HIS name.

	 :	When I say..........I am a Christian,
	 :	I do not wish to judge.
	 :	I have no authority,
	 :	I only know I'm loved.

	 :		 <*}}}}>< Author and original piece see Below

Originally by Carol S. Wimmer: see http://www.carolwimmer.com/thePoem.cfm.)

-----

Thank You EarleMartin! I am going to add the original below! I have always wondered who wrote the piece!

[''I added the author, actually; Earle just improved the way the reference was given.'']
         : O...well thank you VERY MUCH! 

[You might be interested in Carol's own take on the layout and punctuation:

"Simply put...the poem is featured in 2 lines instead of 4 for no reason other than fitting 8 verses into a small pop up page. The meter is in fact a 4 line meter.

Periods have been intentionally omitted because each verse represents a completed thought or concept rather than 2 completed sentences per verse.

.

.

.

Truthfully, I never gave punctuation a thought when posting this poem other than attempting to accurately punctuate, "I am a Christian" and other phrases that indicate something literally spoken.

Please feel free to use your own discretion when quoting the verses."

----

WHEN I SAY, "I AM A CHRISTIAN" 

When I say, "I am a Christian,"  I'm not shouting, "I've been saved!"
I'm whispering, "I get lost!  That's why I chose this way"

When I say, "I am a Christian,"  I don't speak with human pride
I'm confessing that I stumble-needing God to be my guide

When I say, "I am a Christian,"  I'm not trying to be strong
I'm professing that I'm weak and pray for strength to carry on

When I say, "I am a Christian," I'm not bragging of success
I'm admitting that I've failed and cannot ever pay the debt

When I say, "I am a Christian,"  I don't think I know it all
I submit to my confusion asking humbly to be taught

When I say, "I am a Christian," I'm not claiming to be perfect
My flaws are far too visible but God believes I'm worth it

When I say, "I am a Christian,"  I still feel the sting of pain
I have my share of heartache which is why I seek His name

When I say, "I am a Christian,"  I do not wish to judge
I have no authority--I only know I'm loved

Copyright 1988 Carol Wimmer

----
CategoryHomePage