http://www.keithmann.com/keith2a.jpg

mailto:keith@keithmann.com

http://www.keithmann.com

'''Real Work:''' Enterprise architect for a firm in the transportation sector. Lots of TOGAF, Agile, SOA, Semantic and Canonical Data  and other fun stuff. 

'''Fun Work:''' Developing an evaluative framework for information technologies based on theories of human cognition, biology, and information itself. Modelling the infinite.

'''Completely Unjustifiable Work:''' Pondering how much better the Web would be if it were more like the way I think VannevarBush envisioned it in AsWeMayThink. (Observation: Wikis are much closer to the MemexVision than conventional webpages).

'''Non-Work:''' Restoring my c.1920 Craftsman bungalow in Dundas, Ontario, Canada; woodworking; cartography; stargazing; studying history, philosophy, and religion; genealogy (so far, back to 1708 in Banffshire, Scotland); very slowly learning to play the guitar; whatever else happens to catch my interest.

'''Family:''' Wife Suzanne; daughters Devyn (b.2003) and Molly (b.2007)

'''Education:''' B.Sc. (Honours), Biology (esp. Molecular Biology and Signal Transduction), M''''''cMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, 1992.

----
'''Please leave a message...'''

Do you have any kind of feel for how many (genetic, I suppose) variants of a particular messenger molecule recepter may exist on any given cell or class of cell?? -- DougMerritt

Wow, that's a pretty broad question, Doug! The simple, but not very meaningful, answer is that the number of possible genetic variants for any gene depends, of course, on the number of base pairs in the gene. I suspect what you're looking for is the number of viable (significant?) mutants and that depends greatly on the protein itself. To give you some sort of ballpark there are over 300 mutants of the androgen receptor. I'm hardly an expert though since I've been away from the field for many years and I only casually keep up-to-date on advances. -- KeithMann

Thanks for your answer; that's kind of what I was afraid of. -- Doug
----
CategoryHomePage