Kombucha is an ancient tea beverage that is made through a natural fermentation process.

----
[From: wikipedia] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kombucha

[quote] The recorded history of this drink dates back to the Qin Dynasty in China (around 250 BC). The Chinese called it the "Immortal Health Elixir," because they believed Kombucha balanced the Middle Qi (Spleen and Stomach) and aided in digestion, allowing the body to focus on healing.[citation needed] Knowledge of kombucha eventually reached Russia and then Eastern Europe around the Early Modern Age, when tea first became affordable by the populace. [/quote]

----
'''A personal account:'''

I know that this page has brought some controversy in the past few days, but my personal experience with my home-brewed Kombucha is noteworthy.

If I were pressed to put one word to my experience thus far, it would be "WOW!".

'''Why:'''

I have several chronic and serious medical conditions: Coronary Artery Disease (most likely result of childhood illness); Arthritis (from injury and surgeries); Chronic, severe, debilitating nerve-pain (do to congenital deformity and multiple attempts at corrective surgery); And several immune-system related disorders.  Most of these conditions have been actively treated for 29 years.

Results after 2 weeks of use of Komucha:

'''Coronary Artery Disease:'''

I have had 2 stents placed in one artery of my heart, and am currently in evaluation for further stent placements.  I have been on a plethora of drugs to control persistent angina, irregular heart rhythm, shortness of breath, and extreme tiredness, all of which are the result of lack of blood flow to one side of my heart muscle.  I have been unable to achieve satisfactory relief with any prescription products to date.
* Kombucha has given me so much relief for these conditions, that I am currently considering postponing further artery stent placement (However, I am still participating in heart testing, and active consultations with cardiologists and experts in the field, so time will tell if I go forward with more stents or have bypass surgery).

'''Arthritis (wrists):'''

I have had no success with any prescription or commercial product.
* Kombucha has reduced arthritic pain and increased flexibility significantly, compared to prescription and other commercial products. 

'''Chronic nerve-pain:'''

I have had little relief of this pain, outside of some relief from opiate-derived prescription products.
* Kombucha has had no detectable affect on this.  However, I have noticed an improvement in my mood and overall disposition.

'''Other:'''

Hypothyroidism, Asthma, allergies (of food origin, and airborne), Pernicious Anemia, and immune system.
* With the use of Kombucha, I have noticed an improvement with all of these, and have noticed overall better health.

'''Would I recommend it to others?:'''

A big, YES! (As with all alternative treatments and medications, one should always do your research and consult your physicians before using, or brewing this product.)

----
Update:  I had to quit using Kombucha when my heart started to really act up, and after being off it for awhile my heart settled down some.  I guess Kombucha is only just so good, as I just underwent double CABG (Cabbage: Coronary Artery Bypass Graft).  My parents are still using it with great success, and my mother is a 25 year post triple bypass.  A couple of other family members are still using with great success, but another brother with heart artery disease had to quit like me, and is probably looking at surgical intervention as well.

I do plan to try using Kombucha again, after I heal from surgery, but will be trying a version made from honey that supposedly has less side affects. [Can't let Google employees have a leg-up on me!]

----
Suggestion: you might want to make a web page (html, free hosting, something) for these claims and your experience, as this doesn't seem to have much to do with C2 wiki, programming etc. We get the idea that Kombucha tea is something to check out.
----
see: ThereMustBeWhatKindOfFood