''LeadingQuietly: An Unorthodox Guide to Doing the Right Thing '' by Joseph L. Badaracco Jr.

http://images.amazon.com/images/P/1578514878.01.__PE_SCMZZZZZZZ_.jpg

[ISBN 1578514878] "Quiet Leaders are Realists"

Review -- From: Publishers Weekly (Copyright 2001 Cahners Business Information, Inc)

When we think of great leaders, it's usually the charismatic, globally influential Churchill, Patton, Jack Welch who spring to mind. But as Harvard Business School professor Badaracco (Defining Moments: When Managers Must Choose Between Right and Right) correctly points out, everyday leadership is not so dramatic, and daily leadership decisions are rarely carried out at the top of an organization. Badaracco focuses here is on helping the middle- and senior-level managers who make the ordinary decisions that ultimately determine an organization's success. As he puts it: "What usually matters are careful, thoughtful, small, practical efforts by people working far from the limelight. In short, quiet leadership is what moves and changes the world." Out of a four-year study of these real-life leaders, Badaracco describes eight strategies for making effective leadership decisions in murky situations where the "right" thing is far from obvious. The strategies range from the commonsensical (truly examine the question at hand; don't ignore corporate politics) to the counterintuitive (don't expect to be wholly altruistic and accept that some of your motives are self-interested; try not to make important decisions as quickly as possible). Badaracco presents each principle with a brief introduction, followed by a case study and summary of the lessons to be learned. The sum is a useful checklist middle-level managers can put to work immediately. 

* Any suggestions for those working in companies where there are lingering doubts about the integrity of the senior management team? ChangeYourOrganization option number 2 is not a viable option for the most of us.

----
CategorySuccess CategoryBook