Scientist, inventor, artist...
He had a keen eye and quick mind that led him to make important scientific discoveries, yet he never published his ideas.

Inventor of parachute.

He is said to be the greatest genius human being ever lived. The Camera Obscura (dark chamber), the wheelbarrow,  locks for canals, various means of repelling besiegers, the cofferdam for building foundations, the machine for sawing marble are commonly said to have been invented by him. See http://www.quickannounce.com/leonardo-da-vinci-an-italian-genius/ for more information.

He was invited by the new King of France, François I, who initially hosted him in  the still-standing castle overlooking the river at Cloux, and eventually built Leonardo his own house, for privacy, at the base of the castle's hill, where he died a few years later in 1519.

He traveled to France on mule-back, carrying only 4 of his favorite paintings with him, one of which was the Mona Lisa, which possibly contributed to the latter's initial fame, and certainly accounts for its current quarters (the Louvre).

That French house is now a museum dedicated to LeonardoDaVinci.
----
Leonardo Da Vinci Quotations
----
''As a well-spent day brings happy sleep, so life well used brings happy death.''

''Iron rusts from disuse; water loses its purity from stagnation and in cold weather becomes frozen; even so does inaction sap the vigors of the mind.''

''Patience serves as a protection against wrongs as clothes do against cold. For if you put on more clothes as the cold increases, it will have no power to hurt you. So in like manner you must grow in patience when you meet with great wrongs, and they will then be powerless to vex your mind.''

''You do ill if you praise, but worse if you censure, what you do not understand.''

''Intellectual passion dries out sensuality.''

* I looked up the dictionary for the word ''sensuality'', and I take it to mean this passion is actually good for you. Any further details to support how it is so? I am very interested for material suitable for this wiki. 
* Intellectual passion dries out sensuality. Meaning that pursuing too many intellectual goals, means that you focus on the ming [meaning?] instead of feelings, it separates you from the world of feelings and emotions. So make sure that the only things that you pursue in life are not just one or just the other. For if your only passion were sensuality then your intellect would grow rusty with non-usage. Understand? Good. 
* By the way, thanks for the quotations, these are good. -- dl

~ added by Onur YILDIRIM
