WHERE TO FIND INFORMATION ON GAMES FOR WORKSHOPS.

In terms of BOOKS there are several kinds of sources: books on New Games (aka non-competitive games), books about Warmups and Exercises for workshops, and books about working with children.  You can also attend a COURSE on new games, though I've never seen a course on games for using in workshops.  Mostly you will PICK THEM UP by being on courses where they are used.  I've never seen anything on the WEB.

BOOKS
I don't include much publishers' details here as the information I have is incomplete and probably out of date.

Donna Brandes & Howard Phillips, Gamester's Handbook No 1

Donna Brandes & Howard Phillips (?), Gamester's Handbook No 2

Andrew Fluegelman, The New Games Book

Terry Orlick, The Cooperative Sports and Games Book

Terry Orlick, The Second Cooperative Sports and Games Book
Marta Harrison & others, For the Fun of It!, (from Nonviolence and Children, Philadelphia Yearly Meeting, 1515 Cherry St, Philadelphia PA 19102 - mine is dated 1982)

Marianne Torbert, Follow Me (see FollowMe)

Anonymous, Playfair (from Impact Publishers, San Luis Obispo CA)

Jo Malseed, 48 Warm-Ups for Group Work (from IHE, Lonsdale College, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YN, England - no ISBN, published 1992)

BruceAnderson - very initial draft - 20i97
---------
Found a new website - a very initial draft - with a collection of quiet and dynamic "party" games http://www.pacifier.com/~shaffer/games/games.html http://www.stackcheck.com''(seems dead)''.  It tells how to organize relays, stage parties for large groups, plan entertainment and lead your group in song.

John Newstrom and Edward E.Scannell, Still more games trainers play - experiential learning exercises, Mc''''''Graw-Hill
This is a series of books (Games, More Games ...) not all of them quiet.

Andy Kirby, Games for Trainers(from icebreakers, energizers to communication games), Gower 1992 - [ISBN 0-566-07260-2]

Each game is presented in a standard format including objectives, material required, recommended timing, instructions. All the games are indexed by objectives.
Contains an excellent introduction on the use of games, types, feedback.

My best source for the rougher stuff is my son's scouts-leader-course. --- MartineDevos
-------
Indoor (most):

Gary Kroehnert: 100 Training Games gives an "academic" explanation of the difference between games, simulations, brain teasers, role-plays and case studies. He codes his games as Icebreakers, Team-building, Communication, Facilitator/Presentation, Energiser, Learning, Perception, Evaluation and Selfmanagement. There is a useful gamesgrid included. ISBN 0 07 452770 3.

Outdoor:

Carmine M. Consalvo: OutdoorGamesForTrainers. 
Each game is presented in a standard format including objectives, materials required, approximate timing, detailed guidance on what to do, when, and how, covering contents and process. Some of the games can be done indoors.


-- They do look like lots of fun! We tried some out -- Martine Devos

----
CategoryGame