The language we use reflects our own character and sends messages about what we think not only of others, but of ourselves. To communicate well, we need to choose our words carefully and see to it that they are understood and have clear meanings. It would be better if vulgar language were not used on this wiki, especially as the title of a page.

'''Alternative Expressions may communicate more effectively'''

"That's foolish/deceitful/boastful,".  Or even better: "I disagree with what you have said, because ...".  Simply labeling a page with profanity as a statement because you don't agree with its content is not helpful to anyone.  '''It is not a BadThing to avoid unpleasant or inappropriate word choices'''

'''Dealing with the reality'''  

Deal with it! Calling it names does not fix it. You can start dealing with the reality by doing your part to change perceptions, and focus energy on manageable matters. So often vulgarity is an expression of the seeming hopelessness that things can not be made better. If something doesn't go the way you wanted and you see no way to make it right (in your view), so you express your frustration via vulgarity.  Isn't much better to deal with the real object rather than an alias? Think about it! Deal with it! 

What I do with the reality and what you do with the reality is not what "we" do with the reality. I will continue to express myself minus vulgarity. What you do is your business.  I would rather spend some time correcting the pages needing correction or enlightenment. Otherwise I can be said to have "tolerated it". See also PositiveDialogueCommunity
-----
'''Employ language which will be received'''

The problem of vulgarity is not that it is impolite, but that it's rarely effective; if you use vulgarity you're probably not going to communicate much else. Many people here wish to discuss things calmly, with mutual respect. Vulgarity is rarely used in a respectful manner. There are other places far more suitable for flame wars, for example UseNet.
-----
'''Forbidden Word List not an alternative'''

To suggest a list of forbidden words to be imposed from without, will prove to be ineffective. The individual must make the choice as to what words they will use, for it is true that all have a distaste for someone else telling us what is and is not appropriate, in word or in deed. If any list should be made and followed it should include the common, rude and insensitive words that dull or make communication ineffective. In order to communicate well one should as well eliminate buzzwords and popular phrases that have lost their meaning in overuse and extension into areas not fitting. One should rarely use speech as a whip, or in ways intended to make someone feel small, insignificant, or unappreciated. 

----
'''Filtering and Censorship'''

Some wiki users are using machines or networks that will automatically prevent the transfer of web pages containing offensive language, or that block access to entire domains that are marked as "adult".  Gratuitous profanity prevents access to content unnecessarily.
----
Related: WikiSocialNorms, GoodStyle, AnotherViewOnVulgarity
------
CategoryDialogue
CategoryCommunication