Deleting a page skips over the possibility of filling that page with value.

In other words:  Which is better, removing noise, or adding signal?

''Deleting a valueless page does not prevent anyone from creating a valuable page.  Removing noise is beneficial, even if it is not as valuable as additional signal.  Deleting a bad page may even encourage people to create a better page.''

Deleting vacuous page is good. It puts the link back to the WantedPages list.
----
I'm not the original poster, but maybe he means something like AddingValue.  All of business (and most other social interactions) are about creating value one way or another.  

People consider different things "profitable."  That's basically how any barter system works.  In a society based around currency, a lot of folks seem to be forgetting this, and instead treating money as a product of its own, pushing paperwork around and only creating profit for themselves.

In the long run, expecting compound interest in your finances without producing anything of value to anyone else leads to a vicious cycle and economic burnout.

''Who are you and how can I work for you?''

rar, believe it or not, but you actually profit whenever someone hires you.  Why else would you do it?  Either you  have that good feeling you get for doing charity, which has value to you, or you have money, or whatever, as your reward for helping improve someone else's productivity.  

A good example of "Only creating profit for yourself" would be to set up a mail-order business where folks send you green, never send them anything in return, and flee the country with lots of folks' money.  Everyone but you is pissed off, lacking in that thing they value slightly more than cash, and lacking in cash at the same time.  

Being horribly unfair, however, or having great disparity in how ''you'' get paid compared to your employees, still creates value.  Every organization creates some value for all of its members, otherwise it wouldn't get very large before people got pissed off, fed up, and left.
----
See also WikiContentGenerationProcess (''and here I thought this page was going to be about the NullObject Pattern!'')

CategoryWiki