Projects which have a part one and a part two, in which what is done in part two is dependent upon two factors:
* How well Part one has been executed and the flexibility and extensibility of the product of that part of the project
* How much and what quality of management and support is given to the part two.

A good example of what is implied here can be illustrated by the ongoing Mars Exploration effort which has far exceeded the planned and expected lifetime. Partly because of the design, but mostly because of the ManagingAfterDeployment. The careful balancing of use and rest of the probes including the planning of routes and forward and reversal strategies have allowed the project to continue many multiples of the original time-span.

This scheme can also be used in things as far removed from this project as in politics, green-activism, tax and economic policy, energy-provisiona and conservation. 

Examples: 

In politics the managing after-election of requiring the electee to keep promises to act, not for party or special interests, but the interests of '''the people''' for which government is supposed to be of/by/and for.

In the case of fuel-efficient cars: If the part one (manufacture, marketing and sale of fuel-effienct automobiles is coupled with the ManagingAfterDeployment with ride-sharing and multi-occupancy(not only of the fuel-efficient, but of the large-capacity vehicles) such that the gallons/per commute is considerably reduced, coupled with partial work-force wireless-commuting (to make work-at-home or satellite work-centers possible).

The capture of beneficial gas emissions and heat from formerly smoke-stacked expulsions into the atmosphere of existing and future plants to allow production of such useful things as Food-Grade CO2 and Dry-Ice Refrigerants as well as an Injection gas for recovery of additional energy from existing nearly depleted sources, and the recovery of otherwise wasted heat for space-heating and generation of electrical energy. 

Personal Economics policy which requires the accumulation of the required sales price before acquisition for all purchases except the necessary purchases which are for immediate and long-term use which exceed short-term savings potential and are financed by loans (not credit-cards). (Pay as you go Economics)

In software production, the part two which is sometimes neglected is making sure that ItWorks not only now, but so that ItWorks in the future through support and patches or provision of free or low-cost upgrades.