Mark Marcarian (born April 20, 1973) is an American film, television and voice over actor. Throughout his new second and varied career, he has been consistently acclaimed for his versatility and is considered by many to be one of the talented character actors. Marcarian began his professional acting career in 2009 in The Scarebrothers Haunted Nightmare attraction in Hatboro, PA. where he portrayed the very popular dancing zombie character Meat Eater Mark. Since then he has gone on and still going on adding better and better roles. 

Born and raised in Philadelphia until the age of five, Mark came from a creative family. His mother Elizabeth was a Miss USO and an accomplished painter. Mark was always the proverbial class clown.
His father Jean Marcarian was born in Marseilles, France and came over with his sister Louise. Marks uncle Mike who was his Aunt Louise's husband was also a great artist as well. My Uncle Mike truly influenced me a great deal as an artistic person.

After graduating from Cinnaminson High School, Mark had a desire to get into television broadcasting so he attended the infamous American School of Broadcasting which was owned by Long John Wade the disc jockey from Philly. Mark still had his share of D&A problems but did eventually stop all of that on his own.While attending American Academy of Broadcasting (AAB), Mark migrated back to his home base in Warminster to live with his best friend Peter Betts for some time. Mark worked odd jobs, mostly in retail as he made his way through Bucks County Community College as a communications major. 

Mark started in the parts business at this time and quickly moved up to leading roles. Always a hard worker and "go-getter" Mark had the gift of gab so to speak as well as a very strong work ethic because of working for his Uncle Pascal some years back. Eventually, Mark became a retail manager and moved onto companies such as Pep Boys, Giant and Amerada Hess Corporation; (HESS gas stations)Mark was married in April of 1986 but divorced in 1998. He has two children, Brandyn and Ryan. "Mark was always trying to make people laugh. He had too because his home life growing up was terrible. His outlet was to be a clown and make others laugh. To this day, I still think back and chuckle." states childhood friend Scott Schubert.

In the meantime, Mark has enjoyed acting in film and has stepped up his goals and drive to become a truly awesome actor. He has been in fifteen films playing all types of roles from a lawyer, doctor, serial killer, father he has great range be it a comedy, horror, action or drama. Says Mark, "I love to act because it is a true form of escapism when I can actually step into someone's life and become that person.", "I was always clowning around, trying to make people laugh and truly love to perform, especially in front of a camera."
- IMDb Mini Biography By: V & S Talent