I'm an independent consultant in Meckenheim, Germany. I specialized in OO business systems, especially in the context of insurances, telco and government.

After 10 years as a software developer and project leader, and 3 years as a
manager, I became a consultant and found customers who run their own object oriented software development projects.

----
My email: mailto:mbohlen@mbohlen.de 

My Web: http://www.mbohlen.de/
(see the link "English pages" on the left)

My phone: +49-170-7728545
My fax:   +49-2225-945189

My address: Luise-Albertz-Str.25; D-53340 Meckenheim; Germany
----

In late 1993, I found the GOF pattern mailing list and liked it very much, immediately. I did a small amount of proof reading on some chapters of the book.

----

I did my Diploma in Computer Science in 1985. During the last few years of my studies (81-85), I wrote two of the first native code compilers for the MC680x0 family of microprocessors. The first one was SORBAS (Struture ORiented BASic), the second
was FORTRAN 77. The compilers were sold by a small company in southern Germany
specializing in real-time and process control.

This week (December 2001), I heard that there are still users
of SORBAS who love it and miss it on the PC platform.

After a few more years as a freelance software developer, I joined a CAD/CAM
system writing company and did a lot of C and C++ stuff, from device drivers
to my first OO experience with Booch cloud models. I stuck with those people
for ten years.

After three more years in a consulting and knowledge management software company,
where I founded a consulting competence center for OO application development, I
realized that being independent would be good for me.

Since then, I have been working with customers who run their own object oriented software development projects.

At present, I am thinking about writing a book ...
----

Non-CS interests include music (I play violin, a little guitar and keyboard),
good movies and philosophy.
----
A comment from GernotStarke: There are times when I find MatthiasBohlen contemplating the world
and other stuff in a exceptionally nice Italian restaurant - he seems to enjoy good food
and a nice chat :-)

Alas - he HAS written that book - it is just a few days from hitting the stores.

----

CategoryHomePage