A lot has happened since I added this page in 2001.  I did get on some (mostly) agile projects.  I've had many opportunities to teach agile principles.  It's been a blast.

I have been programming since I bought a kit in 1981.  The decision to adopt Ruby & Rails (in 2004) was the first time I have chosen my language.  Every other time it was dictated by the hardware or the employer.  It was a good choice.
----
The original text, from 05/10/2001:
I am a 12 year veteran VisualBasic Programmer.  I have been working on DotNet for a few months.  I am looking into using WikiWiki for gathering development requirements.  I was introduced to WikiWiki through ExtremeProgramming.  If you haven't heard of it yet - check it out at http://www.XProgramming.com.  I get a lot of information and contacts from a local users group, http://www.MAVBUG.org.

I have been working on an ASP verison of WIKI, but this has been sidelined by a WYSIWIG version.

I would love to get together with other XP'ers in the Balt/Wash area to discuss XP, see it in action at a real XP shop, and get some more suggestions toward integrating.

The responses to my attempts to incorporate XP practices into my current projects have been mixed.  The interest level is there, but no one is ready to commit.  I have shown them reports, used subsets of XP in small projects, and matched the strengths of XP to almost every weakness that we have - to no avail. 

I have spent many hours reviewing messages on the EGroup.  I have read the trilogy.  I have tried almost every aspect of XP.  Each one has affected my programming differently than I expected... in a good way.  These trials have led me to a decision.  My next assignment will be "XP or Bust".  Words like religion, fanatic, and cult have been used a lot when describing XP.  My coworkers accuse me of evangelizing (I think I am improving).  Well, it has had a profound affect on me and the way I perceive the working environment.  And I haven't even had a chance to really experience it yet.  It has led to further research in related topics.  An unexpected bonus is the caliber of people that are associated with it.  Each one appears to be an excellent person, as well as a true professional.

mailto:mmscili@email.com

----
CategoryHomePage