A passage from Manzoni's '''Promessi Sposi''' (''The Betrothed'') might amuse the MercenaryAnalyst 
The peasant who knows not how to write, and who needs to write, applies to one who knows that art, choosing as far as he can one of his own station, for with others he is hesitant, or a little untrusting. He informs him, with more or less clarity and orderliness, of who his ancestors were, and in the same manner tells him what to set down on paper. The literate person understands part and guesses at the rest, gives a few pieces of advice, suggests a few changes, and says "Leave it to me."
 
He picks up his pen, puts the other's thoughts as well as he can in literary form, corrects them, improves them, embellishes them, tones them down, or even omits them, according to how he thinks best, because---and there's nothing to be done about it---someone who knows better than others has no wish to be a mere tool in their hands, and when he is concerned with the business of others he wants it to go a little in his own way.

----

And how is this different from ''any'' analyst (designer, coder) who translates a customer's wishes into requirements, design, and code?  --PaulChisholm

''As I understand it, they are not stakeholders.  Their job is to articulate the system structure, i.e. what is there, impartially. -- MichaelFeathers''

When an artist looks at the slab of marble, he does not just see a slab of marble.  He sees his masterpiece of beautiful art in all its shape and glory, but in order to be able to purvey this point of beauty to his audience he must use the tools of chisels and hammers.  We are the chisels and hammers.  We become necessary in order for that slab of marble to reach its full potential in art and beauty; however, without either the tools or the artist himself, the product will not be.  --RolandSin

''And when you look closely, you'll see the unique marks of each chisel that has touched the surface of that work of art. -- GeorgeDinwiddie''

Studies show the most enduring mark of humanity will be the notches their hairs scrape in razor blades. Hundreds of millions of years from now, even after the flow of seas and sands and glaciers has erased everything else you do, the unique marks of your whiskers will still be seen by those who look closely.

''Then those of us that still use cut-throat razors are doomed to eternal anonymity.''

''As are those of us who do not shave.''

Right, yeah, um, I think the point is that those of us who add value by performing analysis leave a mark on a product or even a firm. I would like to think that I have been a positive influence at many of the clients I have worked for. I am certain that I have had some effect; I'm just not certain how much of it has been good, bad, or just different.