* Email mailto:Jacksmernov@yahoo.com
* AIM jacksmernov
* facebook www.facebook.com/Autocopy
* http://www.reddit.com/user/icecream2013/

Michael Francis Lidman
30 Allds St
Nashua, NH 03060
603-203-3498
alt 603-424-7818

I fought the Iraq War. Pray for the end or the last war. Nuclear Stalemate. Doomsday Device. Next war there will be thousands of ME's blocking the busiest traffic hubs and getting away with it through insanity. Follow me. Do as I have done and one day you will be as great as Me.¿?.

----
The Love

In the name of God,

Merciful to all,

Compassionate to each!

1.	Say: Can you love at will?

2.	The unbelievers say no, indeed their hearts are hardended fast against the Almighty. But God is always ready to forgive.

3.	Through Realizing love we are made to feel happyness.

4.	You can love with or without will, so by God’s infinate Mercy and Compassion will to be happy. God’s will is that we be happy. Love is the way God has created for us to attain happyness. To be a moral person is a selfish act; or do you doubt the last day?

5.	If we love all who hate and fear only fear; we will hate no One, fear nothing, and finally love even Love as we were commanded.

6.	Love is God is Love. The words aligned themselves through time making this true.

7.	In this the mystory of iniquity is understood: We can be happy regardless of the evils around Us; Unlimited mercy and compassion from God make it possible to realize greater goodness into the universe. Our movement through time is most evident to Us. Make time count.

Michael Francis Lidman (Jesus Michael Muhammad).
 
  
----

I am http://www.reddit.com/user/Nobuddy/

----

The only thing that can be known is that nothing can be known; The only certainty in this world is uncertainty; this joke or lie contains the greatest amount of truth.

Descartes fucked up. You can doubt everything including that you are doubting when you doubt everything as doubting doubting might not be the same thing as doubting or doubting doubting doubting.

English may suck, but at least English allows me the verb forms in order to say that, unlike Latin.

You can not prove that you are thinking. That you are is at best an empirical fact; logical proof ex-nihil of this would be no different if one could find such a "proof".

If you can't remember this when you are certain, that should tell you why next time you should not be certain. The failings of memory should be sufficient to convince you of The Law of Uncertainty.

Now you are free to disagree with yourself, or whoever it was who made those memories you now have. You are free to change your mind as the present dictates.

The Law of Uncertainty is so useful a concept that one need never doubt it. (another joke, laugh at it.)

----
الله مو The All is الله مو The All is الله مو The All is الله مو The All is الله مو The All is...

----

1989 PBS educational series about physics hosted by Phillip Morrison who you may recognize as the voice from the Charles and Ray Eames "Powers of Ten" video.

http://www.viddler.com/explore/jacksmernov/videos/1/

http://www.viddler.com/explore/jacksmernov/videos/2/

http://www.viddler.com/explore/jacksmernov/videos/3/

http://www.viddler.com/explore/jacksmernov/videos/4/

http://www.viddler.com/explore/jacksmernov/videos/5/

http://www.viddler.com/explore/jacksmernov/videos/6/


----

Sometimes I post on reddit as http://www.reddit.com/user/chickan/

Here is my site for my 2008 senate campaign.

http://michaellidman2008.info

Or if that is not working go here.

http://michaellidman2008.blogspot.com/

cafe press store

http://www.cafepress.com/amleetbooks

website

http://1337monkey.com

Rants and Raves

http://nh.craigslist.org/rnr/902630114.html

http://nh.en.craigslist.org/rnr/857710572.html

http://nh.craigslist.org/rnr/854851681.html

http://www.youtube.com/user/jsmernov

http://nh.craigslist.org/rnr/902259158.html

http://nh.craigslist.org/rnr/902011574.html

http://nh.craigslist.org/rnr/901098843.html

torrents

http://thepiratebay.org/user/HShults

----

When I'm in the hospital I'm here
Michael Lidman 
C/O New Hampshire Hospital
APS Building Unit F
36 Clinton St
Concord, NH 03301
603-271-0477
603-271-0478

----

I'm working on a book titled "Idman and the Repeated Memes or On Mental Health"

----

I wrote this to The New Hampshire Supreme Court 

Michael Lidman
19 Mitchell St
Merrimack, NH 03054
15/10/2008
RE: 2008-0691, In re Michael Lidman

There is no and can be no sanity clause in the constitution. It has only been through collection of historical laziness and ignorance of the courts and a misguided legislature that the mental health industry has been able to imprison descent weird people endlessly and disproportionately to whatever crime they may or may not have committed.

There can be no sanity clause in the constitution for it would negate all protections against illegal imprisonment. The courts have abdicated there responsibility to learn what the mental health industry is up to. There is rampant reliance on the opinions of so called experts when the mental health industry has no central theory of mind and therefore no agreement or certainty as to what is a mental illness and what is not.

The DSM III (The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders), which was published just previous to the current manual, lists homosexuality as a disorder. This would not be tolerated today. This was the state of the mental health industry up to the publishing of the current manual in 1994 just 14 years ago.

The mental health industry has no theory of mind or soul. There is no central theory as there is with the hard sciences nor is there a basic understanding of principles of what constitutes mental health in the mental health community. There is just one damn thing after another subject to reinterpretation. The DMS IV (which is being used against me) lists 50 some odd things which only a fraction are needed to diagnose Bipolar Disorder. However, it lists practically the same things for Aspergers, which at present some of the doctors are suggesting I have. How they can call psychiatry a science is beyond our current understanding.

Hebeus Corpus has been our protection against unjust imprisonment since 1305. Hebeus Corpus means the court can extract the prisoner from their jailers clutches to hear the case whenever the prisoner asks to make his or her case. The mental health industry has side stepped this necessary protection by claiming mental health is a civil matter and therefor not subject to Hebeus Corpus.

I ask the court to rule on weather Hebeus Corpus rights apply to the mentally ill “imprisoned” in secure hospitals unable to leave without permission from the doctors; their jailers.

If indeed this is a civil matter then I ask to court to rule on weather the hospital is allowed to give treatment that is not wanted by the patient. I have the right to know what is being put in my body. I have the right to refuse any treatment. I have religious objections to receiving medical treatment from the mental health industry. The Doctors have made it clear that the only way to leave the hospital was to take drugs.

The drug they forced on me is called Zyprexa. This, or one of it's metabolites, is synthetic heroin. Twice I was given an intramuscular shot of Zyprexa and I testify that it got me high. I defy any junky to take Zyprexa intravenously and tell the difference between it and one of the opiates from Afghanistan. The court should feel outrage that I was made high and should be doubly outraged that I was made high against my will. Herowin is the most dangerous drug to society and the individual. New Hampshire Hospital bears a striking resemblance to the opium dens of yesteryear.

If it would please the court, Lilly (the makers of Zyprexa) are the original dicoverers and manufactures of 100% pure Methamphetamine Hcl, a common scourge on the streets also sometimes called Speed or Meth, the destroyer many lives.

I have religious objections to the mental health industry which are being ignored by the hospital; The courts are refusing to hear my hebeus corpus partition when I am clearly in a kind of jail; And there is no Sanity Clause.

Very Truly Yours,
Michael “South Poler Santa” Lidman


----

Please pardon my spelling. Thanks

Vote for me in the U.S. Sentate in New Hampshire this November

"A nuclear reactor in every Hummer"

Look, it runs on water. I havn't had to put gasoleen in it since the Santa’s elvs stole it and returned it on Chistmas.

The US refined 15 thousand tuns or uranium for war. Now Santa has stollen every nuclear bomb the united states had and made small reactors that power all the world’s forms of transperstation.

People thought there was an epidemic of auto theft. But then all the cars and trucks come back on Christmas and the did not need gasoleen anymore. Santa had his elvs convert all the worlds vehicles to nuclear steem power. 

"Look children, they run on water now. Just fill the gas tank with water from your garden hose every once in a while." 

----

8/10-oct/2008

Freedom is just a word here. They violate my freedom of speech by taking away privioges. Privioges are that which can be taken away. I don't want any priviloges. I want rights; Something that cannot be taken away. 

I wrote a request for free speech to my treatment team. They said in return “if apropreate”

I sain person would go crazy here.


----

To the state of new hampshire office of Information Technology. The internet here in the library actualy is more restrictive then the internet is in China. Gmail, Yahoo, Youtube are all blocked. This is unacceptable. I hereby revoke your right to call this "Internet Access"

----

New Hampshire Hospital is a place to go to get drugs and hookups. Go ahead and act out. Get yourself diagnosed with some mental disorder and you will never be let go from the system. What is a pharmasutial company but a place were drugs are made? What is a psyciatric hospital were inorder to be releaced you need to take drugs? It’s really nothing more then a new type of opium den.

I challenge any junky to take any antisycotic introviniously and tell the difference between that and herowin. Zyprexa is a opiet because the OPT resepeters in the brain respond to it or one of it’s matabolites.

----
The greatest threat to this world is the idology that this life is not real. The derivitives of this idiology have produced the kamakaza and the marter. The view that this life is not good in and of itself but mearly the means to a greater life is what underlies the most dangerous psycosies in all religions, christain, budist, or islam. 

The Jewish people do not beleave in an afterlife. They did not have that consept in there culture until Jesus. Jesus may at once be responsible for the greatest clearifications and distalations of jewish thought on getting people to live together and at the same time responsible for viewpoint that brought the greatest amount of suffering in the western world. The horrors of Spanish Inquasision make no sence without the view that there is a world we can live in outside of this world that is more important than this one.

Budisum suffered a simular problem with self-lessness. The kamakure is full of appieles to selfless survice to a master. The Kamacure was found on many of the dead bodies of the kamakaze. 

Selfish forgiveness is the leasin of the prisoner’s delema and the general’s problem. Evalution points us in the true direction of altrusism. Selflessness leads to self-descruction of the only person who can stop the psycosis of these religions; the self.

Translate Allah
The All

----
I am running for US Senate in New Hampshire for the Peer to Peer Party.

Take a look at the ballet. There is something wrong with it. In the fine print it says "select one". This is the problem that has created our two party system. Only two contries that use the same system as ours have more then two parties. 

Cross out the fine print and select all the canadates who you approve of and let the lawyers, judges, and election officials know what is obvious to us. If a ballat has more then one canadate marked it is obvious that the voter is approving of each canadate selected.

I believe this can be done without any change to the law. Simply understanding the principal that the balate is a reflection of the will of the voter. If the voters intensions can be deturmed then the approvals should be counted.

So what if that means that the total number of approvals for all canadates is more then the number of votes. I just want the intensions of the voter to be counted.

So approve of any and all who you wish this election. If you have a slight prefference for Mcain't or Obomber then by all means approve of them. Maybe even number the canadates to show the election officials that you approve of some canadates more then others. There are known ways of counting these things. See Approval Voting or Instant Runnoff Voting.

If you weren't going to vote this time around anyway you have nothing to loose.

Copy this idea and run with it.

----

This is the story of Southpoler Santa

The north pole melted this summer and his work shop sank into the arctic ocein. Many thought that Christmas was going to suck this year but Santa was undounted. Santa packed up all he could fit into his slagh and made the trip to the south pole.

There he meet the scientist who told them about what they were doing and what they had learned at each of the schools they had gone to and about politics and the internet. Santa soon learned about web sites and search engins and peer to peer. He found out how there were many just like him who loved to give all they had on their hard drives and ipods to whoever wanted a copy.

For a while he felt sad because if everyone gave all they had then the world would not need him any more. But then he remembered that that was exactly what he wanted.

Then the scientists said something that made santa thing and with a wink of his pen and ink he looked for his list. You see the word nice comes from nescio which means not to know. He fluffed up his chest and said ho ho ho ho. Everyone is on the nice list this year.

As his elvs began to arive and santa gave them thie news. A mathametition told him what was in his beatiful mind was hatching. Selfshishness and forgiveness go hand and hand. When we play to cooperate we all can win. A physysist told him that there was enough energy for all. Neucliar reactors can now be made save and the safest are small. They even can be bade in shuch a way.,that there is more fuel in the thing after a while. When the reactor is finished it can be recyclied into a larger reactor or two small ones. You don't even need special mettles to do this. You just need the right isotopes. Then the chemist told him how easy it is to make any chemical out of a source of energy and a source of elements with the right apperatist. The biologoyst told him that all things needed for life we know about can be synthisized the same way, and even substances that live dosn't use yet can be made. 

Santa asked "we can make medicin, food, and anything for just the effort to set up a reactor and an aperatus? Yes said the scientists. With your elves you can do it in no time.

"This is going to be the best Christmas since the first one." 



----

I'm stuck behind the great firewall of the Health and human services Nazis. I'm stuck in New Hampshire Hospital with no rights. Habius corpus my ass. Those who are accused of mental illness have no rights in this country. 

The Websense category "Facebook" is filtered.


The Websense category "External E-mail - BLOCK" is filtered.
  
URL: 
 http://gmail.google.com/
 
I'm only alowed half hour streaches in the library and need an email address that isn't blocked or a proxy or something. This place is worce then china

My home page is MichaelLidman


----
CategoryHomePage