The moral aspects of dependency. Some have a difficulty in expressing and understanding the difference that dependency makes on statements, concepts, priciples, theories, experiments, laws and behaviour. Some decisions are based on fixed, rational and widely accepted systems, and others on varying, sometimes irrational, and narrowly defined systems. Moral issues introduce uncertainty in many who do not understand just what part a moral system has to play in these consderations. Illustrated by the following questions: 

''Yeah, but which such statements do '''you''' consider valid?  Are they the same set as mine?  Is killing a person wrong?  Always?  Stealing?  ItDepends, always.''

No two people are in total agreement. In making moral judgements I will make some evaluations that are certainly different from those you make, ItDepends on the person making the judgement. Killing is a moral judgement and differs from person to person and from society to society. The same with Stealing and other activities that deprive another of a GGR. What I chose to value in morality falls under the category of ItDoesntDepend. I try to avoid the use of the words "always" and "never" and will not impose my morality or lack of it upon others.

''AnswerMe: what does GGR mean?''  How about Generally Granted Right? Right to property, Right to Live, Right of Choice, and other such rights. 

The point of a moral persuasion is that choices are related to and depend on a system of beliefs which have been accepted as a way of the governance of ones behaviours and to make one cognizant of behaviour's eventual effects.
Morality is based upon acceptance, either on the part of an individual, or as as shared acceptance of two or more persons (groups). 

In every person or group, if the accepted system of beliefs is ignored, and the system is violated by the actions of the individual or member of the group, then a failure should be recognized and corrected. The corrections available are also dependent on the system and involve continuing acceptance or abandonment of the belief in the individual which in turn will affect the membership in the group defined by that system. See CulturalRelativist

----
CategoryOffTopic 
