	 :	...I am not using ["nationalism"] in quite the ordinary sense, if only because the emotion I am speaking about does not always attach itself to what is called a nation -- that is, a single race or a geographical area.  It can attach itself to a church or class, or it may work in a merely negative sense, ''against'' something or other and without the need for any positive object of loyalty.

	 :	...But secondly -- and this is much more important -- I mean the habit of identifying oneself with a single nation or other unit, placing it beyond good and evil and recognizing no other duty than that of advancing its interests....  The abiding purpose of every nationalist is to secure more power and more prestige, ''not'' for himself but for the nation or other unit in which he has chosen to sink his own individuality.

	 :	It is also worth emphasizing once again that nationalist feeling can be purely negative.  There are, for example, Trotskyists who have become simply the enemies of the U.S.S.R. without developing a corresponding loyalty to any other unit.  When one grasps the implications of this, the nature of what I mean by nationalism becomes a good deal clearer.  A nationalist is one who thinks solely, or mainly, in terms of competitive prestige ... his thoughts always turn on victories, defeats, triumphs, and humiliations....  But finally, it important not to confuse nationalism with mere worship of success.  The nationalist does not go on the principle of simply ganging up with the strongest side.  On the contrary, having picked his side, he persuades himself that it ''is'' the strongest, and is able to stick to his belief even when the facts are overwhelmingly against him....

	 :	It is important at this point to correct the over-simplified picture which I have been obliged to make.  To begin with, one has no right to assume that ''everyone'', or even every intellectual, is infected by nationalism.  Secondly, nationalism can be intermittent and limited.  An intelligent man may half-succumb to a belief which attacts him but which he knows to be absurd, and he may keep it out of his mind for long periods, only reverting to it in moments of anger or sentimentality, or when he is certain that not important issue is involved.  Thirdly, a nationalistic creed may be adopted in good faith from non-nationalist motives.  Fourthly, several kinds of nationalism, even kinds that cancel out, can co-exist in the same person.

	 :	--George Orwell, "Notes on Nationalism", 1945
----
CategoryWorldView