Great cities serve as the quintessential example of piecemeal growth. However, the 9/11 tragedy has created the need for sudden redevelopment in New York and, correspondingly, BigDesignUpFront. We can understand design better by examining such extreme situations. It is in this spirit that the readers of wiki are referred to the following report.

	* http://nynv.aiga.org/nynv_book.pdf -- 50 page report
	* http://nynv.aiga.org/ -- coalition's website

''From the site ...''

New York New Visions is a coalition of 20 architecture, planning, and design organizations that came together immediately following the September 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center. This group, representing over 30,000 individuals, has pooled the collective resources and technical expertise of over 350 professionals and civic group leaders in a pro-bono effort to address the issues surrounding the rebuilding of Lower Manhattan.
 
The coalition members, many of whom live and work in Lower Manhattan, are pleased to present preliminary recommendations for infrastructure, planning, and design that can help make Lower Manhattan more comfortable and appealing for workers, residents, and tourists. It is our hope that these recommendations will inform the large-scale economic and real estate development decisions to be made in the coming months. 

A report containing these recommendations was being presented to Governor George Pataki, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, the Lower Manhattan Redevelopment Corporation, New York's Congressional delegation, city and state agencies, and a wide array of civic, business, and community groups. The result of an inclusive three-month process, this document is not intended to replace the broader public discourse that must and will take place among policy- and decision makers about the future of our city. We offer it now because of the great urgency of the situation, recognizing that speed must be balanced with well-thought-out solutions and sensitivity to many constituencies and issues.