A notebook computer, also known as a ''laptop'' computer, is a small portable computer that is approximately the size of a largish hardcover book.  In general, they use the same operating systems that desktop computers use, and attempt to offer the same functionality, although there are tradeoffs due to the desire for small size and reduced weight.

The current (2004) generation of notebook computers are almost as powerful as desktop machines.  The major shortcomings are speed (slower processors and slower I/O devices), limited hard disk size, and comfort (small screens and small keyboards).  Notebooks also often lack some of the hardware interfaces common on desktop machines, though with most peripherals converging on USB this is getting to be less of an issue.  Notebook computer hardware components have not been standardized or commoditized in the way that desktop computer components have, so notebook users have a limited choice of features and available upgrades, usually from a single vendor.

Portability is obviously the major benefit of a notebook over a desktop machine.  They can be easily carried from site to site.  On battery power, they can be used on airplanes, trains, or in cars.  They are very useful for travelers for retrieving e-mail from hotel rooms or working on the road. WirelessNetwork support is also coming into vogue.

Notebook computers generally have a pointing device other than a mouse.  These devices include trackballs, touch-sensitive pads, and small joystick-like knobs.  Some notebooks also offer jog dials and other alternative controls.

----

Using my notebook computer has become my preferred way of working.  I like working from my easy chair rather than sitting at a desk.  Compiling large programs takes a little longer than it does on my desktop machine, but it's good enough for me.  My main complaint is that many programs require lots of mouse clicks, and that's sometimes difficult to do with a trackpad or eraser-style pointer.  I'm not sure what the answer is, but I wonder if a different style of GUI would be more appropriate for notebooks.  -- KrisJohnson

''I've found that since my notebook has rapidly become my sole computer, I've been looking for ways to reduce mouse usage.  A combination of making CapsLock == Control, EmacsEditor, RatpoisonWindowManager (may try Ion, but I do like the emacs-like keybindings), and Conkeror (FireFox mod for emacs-like keybindings).  I don't use other things heavily enough for the mouse to annoy me any more.'' -- DanielWhite

----

See also NotebookKeyboard, HandHeld