'''Note to all wiki spammers:''' As of ''January 02, 2005'', all changes to this wiki, either by editing or AddingNewPages, will not be picked up by SearchEngine''''''s until '''10''' hours have passed (a page must remain unchanged during that time). All spam on this site is usually deleted in minutes, an hour at the most, so it is pointless to try to add spam of any type to this wiki. See DelayedIndexing.

----
Spammer no can read English?

Yo, Spamma!

''The spammer is quite possibly a 'bot.''

Maybe, but the actions of X were very human last time and this time.

''How so? I'm not disagreeing per se, but I'd be curious to note how your observations differ from mine, as I'm considering setting the SharkBot loose on the spammer.''

* Yesterday, I could only do about 2-3 deletions at a time before I was blocked from further deletion. I had to go to extreme measures to be able to delete pages again. Then I got smart and took a different approach. Today, I have observed tantrums and fits, only as a human editor could. As far as the shark, be my guest and get it done.

''I've just put some preliminary SharkBot mechanisms in place. Note that if you issue too many deletions within a given unit of time, WardsWiki will block you. Not sure what you mean about the "tantrums and fits"... It still looks automated to me, but given the spam originates in China, it's likely you're right either way -- the originator doesn't understand English.''

* Ah yes, well I guess I forgot about that deletion thing (blame it on surgery). Today, as it started, it was kind of playing around, doing a little this and a little that. If I hit it hard and fast, it would stop, and then start again sometime later. If I waited quietly, it would start again also. Sometimes the more I deleted the more it spammed. If it is a bot, it sure had this old man fooled! Well, at any rate, it gave me something to do for a while.
----
We can also alter the code word too. Instead of:

 Type the code word, ABC, here

replace it with:

 Type the code, derived by summing DEF, GHI, and J, here

* When I wrote the above, I had originally used integers because the sum of a set of integers is easy for a human to generate. However, playing cryptography games, where you "sum" letters, is a game I, for one, simply cannot handle. The sum of DEF and GHI is what, precisely? DEFGHI? That's ''concatenation,'' not a summation. So, if you're going to alter my suggestion, make sure your types check. So, can whoever changed the above please either revert the change (or I'll do it if it sits for too long) or otherwise clarify what you're proposing? -- Samuel A. Falvo II

''I appreciate where both of you are coming from, and I propose a combination of the two, but not as you might think. How about where the integers are written rather then in numerical form, since most of these spammers are of non-English speaking countries? To use something similar to Sam's original example:''
 '''Type the number that is the sum of: two hundred eighty-two, two hundred eighty-four, and one, here.'''
''-- Seattle1''

"Type the digits five, six, seven" would suffice.