An OfflineBrowser is a WebBrowser support tool. It aims to stow away selected web pages onto local storage for retrieval later. At times the retained material is used for deferred viewing, and other times the offlined pages are meant to be kept, perhaps for indexing by other means (e.g. desktop search tool from Copernic or Google).

----
'''Example of freeware tools'''

''HTTrack''
* UserStory see next section. Not for dummies.

''MM3-WebAssistant - Proxy Offline Browser''

----
'''Help needed by dummy for HTTrack'''

''Anyone seen a good web link for suitable help?''

I started to use winHTTrack after an eventless install. On first use, it asked me for a proxy (what proxy, I am confused already). Palms start to sweat, and I click the drop down to select an entry that looked good at the time (and put in 8080 for the proxy port).
* turns out it has other lists of different defaults set for me. Good I did not see them else I would have fainted (e.g. Browser ID, spider configuration)
* if I use dialup at home I would not have a clue as to the proxy I should be using. I am spoiled and all I know is a local phone number, a user name and a password. The dialer and networking interfaces in my WindowsXp do the rest.

A second step asked me to name the new "offline project" and location, easy enough.

Then I was asked to choose action ("download web sites" seems good to me), add url (ok, I wanted c2 WebBrowser for test, so complete URL entered there).

The next step it ask me to adjust connection parameters. More headache, I did not change the default, and pressed next.

Finally torture is over. Nothing retrieved, and it was nice to give me an error log I can view, and get a bigger headache.

Starting to think maybe I should have chosen a different offline browser that does not ask questions, except whether I want a visited link should be kept offline. 

Any better choice (freeware suitable for dummies?)

and i use ie6

----
CategoryWebBrowser