''from the org-patterns list, October 9, 1997 ...''

... This reminds me of something that happened at OOPSLA. As some of
you know, the AG Patterns Book had its debut yesterday and I had
the privilege of signing books for purchasers -- a heady experience!

After each book was signed, I pointed the purchaser to a small
gathering of contributors to the book and said, "If you'd like,
these folks would also be happy to sign your book!" One purchaser
remarked that he really wasn't a seeker of celebrity autographs.
I quickly pointed out that these were not celebrities -- they
were just people! The thing that was extraordinary was our
community! The purchaser had a difficult time grasping that but
when he did, he couldn't stop saying, "What an idea! Autographs
of ordinary people! I like that!"

It was wonderful! I'll never forget it!
-- LindaRising

''Anyone want an official Top-signed DataDictionary? -t''

No.  Why?
----

  How we forget 
  that the great wo(man) in front of us 
  was once 
     still is 
  a forgetful wayward child 
     as we are. 
  Great deeds, a great mind 
     should shine forth 
  in every gesture; 
  how disappointing to find 
     s(he) still comes late to the theatre, 
  forgets my name, 
  and is so ordinary. 

--- AlistairCockburn
----
My wife and I were looking through one of our history collection boxes which contains photos, gift-cards, and other items which are a part of our past. One of the items in it caught my wife's eye, and because of the attention she paid to it, mine also. What was it? It was a guest-book from our wedding.
Why was it so special? It contained the signatures of many OrdinaryPeople: Mothers, Fathers, Brothers, Sisters, Cousins, Uncles, Great-Uncles, Grandmothers, Friends, former schoolmates, neighbors, members of the church and dear-friends and business-associates. What memories flooded back as we looked at the names of some almost forgotten people who, with their own hand, had put their names in it. While looking through the names, some were very close and involved in our past, both far and recent, but an occasional one would surprise us because they had come at more than a little cost of time and money. An uncle, all the way from Washington state, (It would be the last time I would see him). A Great-Uncle who was a busy and successful business executive. Dear Great-Aunt Mary, who from my earliest youth was a most influential force in all that is wholesome, good, and lasting. My Grandmother, who also was a wonderful person, whose character had been formed by the hardships and testings of pioneer life, and was based on a deep and personal religious faith. While some of them were quite special and dear to our hearts, most would be classified as OrdinaryPeople, but as we spent quite some time looking through the list, which was much longer than I had remembered, we had within us warmth and glow generated by the memories of each of these dear people. -- DonaldNoyes.20100117

Well, I have been around for nearly 48 years; I have never met any OrdinaryPeople and I am starting to wonder if they really exist. -- TimJarman 22nd January 2010
----
CategoryPerson