If it's smart business for companies to outsource time consuming functions that they're not especially good at, does it make sense for individuals to do the same?

I'm a single programmer. It occurs to me that it might be a smart move for me to use a laundry service, hire a housekeeper, and have groceries delivered. With the time I save, I could grow my business, i.e., take on a small consulting project each month; thus, I'd spend more time doing challenging work, less time doing tedious chores, and expand my resumé all at the same time.

What do you think, sirs and madammes? Is this lunacy, or is it smart time management?

''Charles Givens said as much in a book a few years back. I don't buy most of what he advises, but his logic was correct -- '''if''' you wisely invest the time you save by doing so.''

It is if you make a net profit. I'll leave it to you to define profit.

You win by getting more work time. You lose breaks and opportunity for flirting with the grocery dealer. I personally can think well when doing the washing. I would never let someone else do it. I like the breaks RealLife gives me.

----
''Use a laundry service''

Doing laundry only takes a few minutes -- throw it in the washer, go back to the computer, when it's done throw it in the dryer, go back to the computer. The time-consuming part is hanging it all up in the closet once it's dry.

''Hire a housekeeper''

Or just don't clean house. ;-)

'''"There was no need to do any housework at all. After the first four years the dirt doesn't get any worse."''' -- QuentinCrisp

''And have groceries delivered''

You go grocery shopping? What kind of geek ''are'' you, anyway. -- MikeSmith

You hang your clothes in a closet? What kind of geek are you? Just leave them in the dryer. If you're an especially fastidious geek, tumble them before dressing. -- EricHodges

If you telecommute, you don't even need clothes at all. Well, maybe a bathrobe or boxers or pajamas, if you like having the blinds open. -- JoeWeaver
