... is just what is sounds like. If both programmers have brought their lunches, then the pair programming does not have to stop for lunch. The driver drives while the navigator eats. Then they switch. We started doing this ourselves just to try to increase our productivity. It was not suggested by management, but they certainly didn't complain! Although it's possible that they didn't even notice.

One caveat: this places restrictions on what you can bring for lunch. It can't be distracting for either programmer. Not too noisy (crunching, schlurping), not too fragrant, and not requiring too much attention.

Suggestions: Cold sub sandwiches work well, but don't get the chips (too crunchy). I prefer sushi - the 9 or 12 pack of California rolls and such that you can pick up at the grocery store on the way to work. For some reason, my afternoon slump seems to be smaller when I have sushi. Casseroles and rice dishes are okay if they are not smelly. Some kinds of fruit - bananas are pretty silent; also, seedless grapes, and chopped up cantaloupe. --AlanHensel
----
Better suggestion: Get outside! Take a walk! Enjoy the sun, if it's shining.  Let your brain rest on something different. When you program, just program. When you eat, just eat. --StevenNewton

''That presumes it's not cold and dreary outside.''

Second that emotion! PairProgramming is (or should be) an intense activity requiring a lot of concentration, and that means breaks! -- TomRossen

''Of course we take 10 minute breaks every few hours. That's not the same as punching a big 1-hour hole in your day.''

''So... No! It's more important to me to be able to leave 8 hours after I've arrived.''

Ah!  You must have enlightened management that recognizes flexible hours.  I've seen too many shops that have an 8:00 - 5:00 day with an hour for lunch.  You can work it if you want, but you don't get to leave before 5:00.  For a while, I was in a shop where the culture was such that leaving at 5:00 was early, sometime between 6:00 and 7:00 was ''normal'' -- MartinChernenkoff
----
CategoryPairProgramming