I'm currently working on developing a "Best Practices" textbase and the associated processes for populating and maintaining it.  I've taken a "Patterns Lite" approach to the templates used to document the best practices, and am trying to integrate workshopping and other pattern writing methods into the practice documentation process.

It would seem that one fruitful area for discussion, albeit a bit "meta" in nature, would be patterns for applying patterns in new areas.  In the "Patterns Lite" style we've proposed, I'll contribute my first pattern for applying patterns:
''Name:'' Selling Hammers By Their Shape

''Context/Forces:'' A business unit could benefit from a patterns-like approach, as opposed to their current procedure-based method for documenting their activities.  Balance the need to provide a general and flexible framework for the documentation against the unit's desire not to get involved with more fuzzy-headed theories.

''Approach:''  Cut down the patterns template to a minimum number of slots and sell the advantages of patterns, rather than the name and applications in other areas.  In specific, push:

	*  supports interaction of experts to determine best overall approach

	*  encourages documentation of general practices rather than specific procedures for one piece of equipment or a given subsystem.

	*  documents complementary and associated forces governing a problem.

	*  Can evolve into a more formal approach without loss of knowledge.

	*  minimum cost to implement if Web server software and hardware exists.

''Exceptions:''  May not be a good idea in seriously dysfunctional groups or recently "burned (by previous change efforts)" staff.

RelatedPatterns: "Given Hammers, Find Nails." (AntiPattern)

-- KenMeltsner

----

My intuition says that we should use more of a pull-rather-than-push-approach, and have people buy rather sell.
Will try to give examples, but I am sure others - with more experience can. 
-- MartineDevos 19970209

----
CategoryPattern
 