In my search for truth, I compared biblical truth with spiritual truth and there are contraditions. For example: Biblically it is wrong to divorce. Spiritually, divorce is not a sin. It's simply two people that can't make it work and if love is gone, you're wasting your time staying together. With Biblical truth, love, sexually, is for the opposite sex only. Spiritually, it doesn't matter as long as there's love for one another and not lust.

Another example in a different perspective is stating that an organization will be successful only if everyone agrees to cooperate. At the beginning everyone agrees. Later, everyone is argueing with eachother and no one cooperates. Result, the organization for a just cause is abandoned. My point is that with self will, man is, in my opinion, unable to agree harmoniously on everything and it amazes me that the world functions at all. If there's a universal truth, then why is cooperation so difficult? Thus, everyone has their own truth.

Biblically, Jesus Christ is the way. Spiritually, there is reincarnation. Though Christians see non-Christians as heathens, God sees everyone as God-like. Biblically and spiritually, both are in agreement that Jesus is the way but they see it differently. Christians look at non-Christians as wrong and need to be converted. In a spiritual sense, there is reincarnation and thus everyone will cycle through life until they come to Jesus Christ.

Christians teach, believe in Jesus as the son of God and you'll enter the Kingdom of Heaven. Spiritually, Heaven is within us and through reincarnation, we grow and mature until we are ready to return to the creator.

Getting back to the original question, what is my personal truth, I believe in the will of the Creator. I believe God is love which is consistent with Biblical teaching and spiritual teaching. Thus, those truths that are in agreement are absolute truths. Those truths that are in contradition depends on your personal reality. With contradition, I make my choice that works for me with an open mind that I could be wrong. 