'''AntiPattern Sub-set:''' ''Personality Anti Patterns (PAPs)''

'''Original Author(s):''' ''JamesPoupard'', "ChrisJemmeson"

''Click on CategoryAntiPattern to see other anti-patterns''

''Draft Text - to be completed''

Some people have the ability to give the impression to their management of being more technically and generally adept than they really are.
Some people's limited competence may become exaggerated and sometimes even their peers can be convinced.
Some people can continue to steer and influence things - even though they have clearly a bad track record in the past and should be kept well clear.

They have the ability to persuade others and themselves by a number of methods (PAPs):

'''Blind People with Science'''

They speak technically about a subject to people who don't even vaguely understand, and have no wish to either.
They have little knowledge of the subject matter themselves, but this can usually be hidden in the technicalities.
If someone does understand the subject - they may have to resort to one of the other PAPs, but if repeated attempts fail - they are probably not important enough to matter, and probably a good person to avoid or keep out of the discussion in future.

'''Complete Conviction'''

They speak on the subject with absolute conviction and will clearly indicate that they have already thought of everything you have said, everything you are saying and everything you will ever say and have disregarded it, possibly a long time ago.
They are absolutely convinced that some part of your argument is flawed therefore your whole argument is no longer worth consideration.
There is clearly no flaw in their argument so it is really not worth any further discussion.

'''Painful Persistence'''

Repeating the same argument in different ways with no changes, iteration after iteration can eventually wear down resistance. If the subject matter is of little interest to the intended victim (e.g. higher management) they will quickly fold after being hit with verbal diarrhoea. Even the most resiliant of victims will eventually break down after 10 iterations.

'''Broken Record Syndrome'''

Any discussion or argument is based around the latest article or book they have read, tv programme they have watched or course or seminar they have attended. They will then repeat anything they remember to you, no matter what subject you are discussing. Any attempt to steer to the subject in hand or talk around his little knowledge - causes them to replay the same information.


Discussion below...
----
RefactorMe: Last change October 16, 2003), no backlinks, not linked well, but looks OnTopic
