One of the Pfs series, PFS:Graph, PFS:Report, and so on. Published by Software Publishing Corporation. 

Program By: Alison Fujii, Huey Lee, Mike Mays, Denise Pitsch, Ann Reed, Charlie Leu and Mike Shupe. 
----
In my early computing days, there were a few awesome softwares that changed the way I looked at the computers and softwares. Two of them are VisiCalc and PfsFile. (yeah, dBase as well) Does anyone remember this old database program for Apple ][ with CP/M? --JuneKim

I've been looking for a copy of this, or better still, one which would work on Windows. I have the manuals for pfs:file and pfs:graph. No idea of who the programmers were for the pfs:file, but in the pfs:graph manual the program authors were Mario Chaves, Steve Morris and Carl Hu, if that is any help.-LeeWat2@Hotmail.com


PFS (entire series) was unmatched in flat file db.  another awesome software piece was Lotus 123.  Macro capability was unparalleled.  -bobh1879@yahoo.com 
----
Thank you, Ed Dellert, for providing the names of the PfsFile developers. He told me that he's still using it in his business. I envy him! --JuneKim
----
I worked on PFS: File 2.0 as a summer and then co-op intern (so 9 months on the product).  It is still on an old resume somewhere so I continutally get emails for people hoping I can fix things (which I can't.) I just got one from someone who said they accidentally created a password on a patient database and can't remember it.  Anyone know how to find it in the data file?  landay@yahoo.com

Lee,
 
What current software does the same thing on a pc, has the same look/functions as pfs file that I used in the mid 80s?  We have a small library and I don't want to use Access for this. Surely there's a contemporary version of a flat file database.
 
PFS file was perfect for cataloguing a book, a cd, or a video.  You could make a number of fields for title, author, keyword, catalogue number, abstract, publisher, cost, etc.   You could easily print the whole file on half a page ---made it easy to loan stuff out and made a great small library record.
 
Still searching 9.22.04
 
Eugenie@mcasa.org

----
CategoryDatabase CategoryOldSoftware