Let me say that I found this topic after gladly using myself TikiWiki

I was curious to find any article by the author (Luis Argerich also known by his Amazoned PHP book in English)

Hope globally concious seasonal surfers (or just being new) can get it translated using  babelfish.altavista. com (Spanish to English)

http://www.zonaphp.com/articulo20.php

Let me put here some "repaired" babelfish paragraphs**, i.e.,  to correct "VI editor" wrongly translated "I SAW " editor (a literal translation from Spanish)

If you see the original translation probably will find many more mistakes, for sure.

-----------------
Editores/IDEs/etc

During long time I have used a combination of "vi" (yes, vi) and simple text editors like Ultraedit32 for many projects in PHP, but the last year comence to look for something more coway and practitioner than allowed me to work more express better and. I had the good fortune to gain one of the aids of CodeWalkers http://www.codewalkers.com and as the prize they sent a license to me for Zenx Studio 2.5. (ZS from here and ahead)

I must recognize that it seemed to me a quite interesting product, with help integrated and, oh surprise, a pretty one debugger that for some classes of low level like for example parser of RDF that it was developing at the moment it was to me extremely util. After using ZS happily by a pair of weeks salio a new version of great PHP and went my surprise when giving me account that was no a configuration lapel or "something" that allowed to change the version me of PHP of my ZS. 

After several ideas and returns with the support people they communicated to me that to change of version it was necessary to buy a new ZS. 

Of plus this saying that quickly I left the product and I must confess that I made it indignant, he is not ethical that ZS receives to update the ZS to new versions of PHP when they directly influence the development of interprets. 

It can be understood because we have new versions of PHP in each short while. 
Soon of the "ZS incident" I decided that my next IDE should be a gratuitous product, one feels very badly when something in which it has invested its money becomes poorly usable.

After several tests nowadays I have remained with Eclipse (www.eclipse.org) using plugin for projects PHP that can lower of SourceForge. Eclipse, carrying a bunch of corresponding plugins, offers several features interesting that has done to me
to choose it on other analyzed options. 

In order to begin it is a gratuitous product and with a very important company behind(Big Blue nothing else)

Reason why is to hope that they leave new and better versions. 

Eclipse allows to group directories with archives PHP in projects and is easy to switch from a project to another one which is important if you as I they are lost sometimes between thousands of sources. It comes with good find in you case out that it turns out useful to find in that sources a function or a variable is used that we are changing (where this replace in you case out). Of plus this saying that thanks to plugin the syntax appears colored well and the indents it is formable and very comfortable. Plugin is the sufficiently intelligent thing to detect "functions" and "methods" and to build an index that appears to a flank and can be used to go quickly to a method, very I practice. In addition forming it correctly, Eclipse "parses" the sources when saving them reason why are able to detect syntax errors saving to us the time necessary to run script and to see the errors. Not more pair errors in browser, that also is very good.

The feature more interesting than I have found it in  eclipse is the possibility of creating templates, template is a code block in where "variables oftemplate " can be inserted which soon we can publish when inserting template in a source. 
In order to insert template it is enough with soon to type the first characters of its name and ctrl+space so that it appears a list of templates available that we can use. 

Remarkably, functions of PHP already comes loaded so typing str and ctrl+space we can see a list of functions that they begin with str and to choose one, this is very practical if we forgot, sometimes, the names of functions. 

In my case I have created several templates, for example to add methods set..($val), get..() in classes and others. Building templates takes just a short time and soon code gains long time when introducing quickly as one program.

Some things nevertheless did not walk to me and I would like to know if somebody made them working fine.

Supposedly plugin incorporates help of PHP to Eclipse but I do not see form to find it, on the other hand when positioning mouse on one PHP function would have to appear the parameters that can be happened but in my single case it appears the name of the function, would really be good for being able to see the parameters or that templates inserted the parameters because often one what it forgets is the order of the parameters and long time in going and coming from help is lost. 

Another detail is that I could not find is the form to redefine keys, if somebody knows since to do this in welcome Eclipse it is the commentary.

Something that would be wonderful is to develop plugin for Eclipse that allows to publish templates of smarty emphasizing the syntax, and other wonders. Algun Java-boy this interested in this? I do not have problems in beginning the project but I do not have time to do it everything.

I am really enough contentment with Eclipse and I would like to share experiences of other developers either using Eclipse or other tools to be able, finally, to arrive at tool perfect, if she is that such thing exists.

Eclipse is an excellent edition tool but it does not have to debugger, since it lets use Zend Studio I have not used no to debugger for PHP, if they know some gratuitous one that deserves to be proven ahead with the commentaries.




P.S.

Nevertheless the above tranlation issues related to a PhpIde article, let's say that the TikiWiki product has clear multilingual features:

http://tikiwiki.org/TikiWikiInternationalizationAndLanguages


**Dynamic translated (in a hurry) by: N.L.

