Hi,

Living in Thailand now, in Bangkok.

Working as a software engineer (developer).

I started programming about 10th grade.

Starting with Pascal.

Then C++; got my head exploded trying to learn about Makefile and those shell commands while I only had MS Windows at that time (And MFC is not C++ in my opinion).

Then fell in love with Java about its huge amount of available library, standard and easy to work with compiler.

Got my SCJP since my sophomore in university.

Learning Linux sometimes now, but since I don't have internet at home, installing some programs is a pain (chasing dependency while you are offline? Ouch!!).

Now learning Lisp, starting to like its CLOS and error system. Only thing missing is finding Opensource solution I can grab to work on in Windows Platform (Yes I like Linux but my customer is not running it).

My interest now is Linux, XP(programming, not Windows), Java, Ruby and Lisp.

I got some part time contract to do CRUD screen for insurance agencies. 

Trying to use lisp, but since i can't afford even corman lisp. My two solution are Java or Python.

'''Hi Pisin''' -- have you tried cygwin? You should be able to get CMUCL, Guile or CLISP to run on Windows with that
Or I see that CLISP have a build for Windows for download here.  [[http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=1355]] 
Good luck - sorry I am using Linux

I'm using CLISP on my Windows now. But I didn't know CMUCL can be run on Cygwin. Thanks, I'll try it.

'''20050624'''
Start using ArmedBearCommonLisp. It seems to have a bright future. Now I have my own simple Swing Binding to work.

------
'''Part Time Job and Hobby'''

Now I have a hobby of trying to create lisp binding for wxWidgets.
* 20050221 using ah2cl for generating ffi binding, got wxString to work, but still have problem when deleting the object though.
* 20050221 Getting a small custom product for creating customer database, I'll try using RubyOnRails to do it. Rails is the best web frameworks to date. (No Lisp here because I'll be interacting with much of Windows and COM).

Anyone has programming job of Lisp, I will be very interested.
Especially over sea job.

------
'''Pages I'm currently involved'''

-------

'''20050319'''
I'm Back!!!, After whole week of the new Ward's page edit system. I never have got the code word for editting any page.
First I guess, he migh not be in wiki the same time I am. But after seeing other people make an edit while i'm blocked. It seemed that he banned my IP. Not just me though, he probably banned range of IP (cause my friend's PC in the same group can't edit either). I was so sad because I have never deleted anyone's page nor posting any spam on this site. I don't consider my behavior anywhere near vandal at all. Hopefully my IP will not get banned again.

''Almost everyone was banned during nonsupervised times. I got the EditCodeWord from one of the trusted stuarts. Maybe it will reach you sometime too.''
----
CategoryHomePage