Sorting the wheat from the chaff with respect to KnowledgeManagement is best done, imo, but starting with the distinctions between InformationManagement and KnowledgeManagement, and more generically, between KnowledgeAndInformation.

The best starting point for me is my understanding that knowledge only resides in our minds.  Whenever we seek to share or transfer knowledge, we create information as the means of sharing it, and often store the information in some other medium.

With this starting point, it is much easier to make some clear distinctions as to whether the claims being made about KnowledgeManagement are in fact about KnowledgeManagement, or would more appropriately be named InformationManagement.

----
Far too many of  vendors do not believe there is a difference between 
knowledge management and information management.  They recognize only 
that market hype has shifted public opinion, so they are morphing to catch 
up and reposition their products. Can you blame them? 

Much of what purports to be knowledge management is in reality information 
management.  Just the other day  I heard a rep selling scanners as a core 
KM technology, "essential for knowledge sharing,"  without which the 
organization was doomed to be bypassed by every other firm going down the 
knowledge track. 

The distinction I like to make, is working with objects (data or 
information), is IM and working with people which is KM. Information 
Management is about documents, CAD drawings, spreadsheets, program 
code. IM means ensuring access, security, delivery, and storage. It deals 
exclusively with explicit representations. Creation, use, learning, meaning, 
understanding, and negotiation are NOT core issues but efficiency, 
timeliness, accuracy, veracity, speed, cost, storage space and retrieval 
ARE central concerns in IM. 

Knowledge management recognizes value in originality, innovation, 
agility, adaptability, intelligence and learning. It seeks to leverage 
the capacity of the organization in these areas. KM is concerned with 
critical thinking, innovation, relationships, exposure to ideas, patterns, 
competencies, and collaboration. It supports communities and individual 
and group learning.  KM strengthens alignment and encourages the sharing 
of experiences, failures, and best practices. KM may use technology to 
foster dialog, increase communication, share context or negotiate 
meaning but this is not the core focus. 

A people focus in KM extends to recruitment, rewards, retention, 
recognition and reification. KM is about intangibles, intellectual 
capital, competitive advantage and innovation-- NOT objects. 

The division between information and knowledge management is not 
clear cut, take knowledge artifacts with their grounding in information 
systems but their value depending on alignment, belief and negotiated 
meaning. The role and representation of concepts often tend to blur the 
distinction between inference and intuition. Meta-data plays an 
increasing a part in supplying context,  while subtle differences 
between data translations and information transformations often help to 
keep us guessing. Negotiation and social conventions around boundary 
objects then carry and convey meaning between communities helping 
learning and understanding. 

Knowledge management operates at a more abstract level than IM. This 
often makes the causal links with benefits and tangible assets difficult to 
grasp and explain but that does not render them less real or lower the 
strategic importance of KM.  DenhamGrey
----
Well said and on target. - DougAcker
----
CategoryKnowledge