''Hi, and welcome to WardsWiki.  This is a wiki with related to software and programming, and I have a feeling that your material doesn't really belong here.  Please read carefully the page "WelcomeVisitors" and consider putting this somewhere else.  Someone might take it into their head to delete it without warning.''
----

Present Core meeting guidelines test




							DATE : 20-5-2008

ELECTED  TOPIC – MEETING GUIDELINES


CLASSIFICATION :

1.	TEAM MEETING
2.	CONSULTANT MEETING
3.	SITE MEETING
4.	PROJECT REVIEW MEETING


BROAD GUIDELINES  FOR THE ABOVE ARE AS MENTIONED BELOW :

1.	TEAM MEETING

A .  agenda- 
a ) shall consist of  the schedules / deliverables given by the architects ( master list)
b)  action plan  for the deliverables not  delivered
c ) percentage of non deliverables / deliverables ( which will assess  the   
        performance of the architects in terms of achievements  )
d ) plan of action for one month and mini milestones on weekly basis
e )  format to be done for all the above and assessment and details  to be sent to 
      management for review for performance gradation
f ) time allottement as agreed upon 
g )  review of the previous minutes of meeting well in  advance for the necessary deliverables



2.	CONSULTANT MEETING

A.	agenda –
 a ) shall consist of  the schedules / deliverables given by the consultants ( master list )
 b ) action plan  for the deliverables not  delivered
 c ) percentage of non deliverables / deliverables ( which will assess  the   
        performance of the consultants  in terms of achievements  )
 d ) plan of action for one month and mini milestones on weekly basis
  e )  format to be done for all the above and assessment and details  to be sent to 
      management for review for performance gradation
f ) incorporation of the necessary services as per the check list and documenting
g ) necessary statutory approvals 


3 SITE MEETING

A.	agenda 
a)	review of the previous minutes of meeting well in  advance
b)	highlighting the issues which are not resolved for  a long time
c)	critical issues to be highlighted and should raise the level of meeting, if required



4.PROJECT REVIEW  MEETING

A.	agenda 
a ) status of studio level deliverables
b ) status of  consultants deliverables
c ) status of  contractors delverables
d ) critical issues delaying the project and its solution
e ) critical issues  having impact on the cost of the project and its solution
f ) documentation of all decisions  both in respect of architects and engineers
g ) status of architects fee collection and its solution
h ) status of consultants fee payments  and its solution


