The optimal mode of organization in agile contexts, according to AgilePrinciples.

A comparatively little-discussed practice of agile processes.

The subject of a workshop at XpTwoThousandAndFour; see http://selforganizingteams.com/ or the CFP below.

-----

'''Call for Participation:''' "Be empowered (that's an order)"

 A workshop on self-organizing teams

 June 6, 2004
 Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany
 Part of XP2004 Conference

Workshop Wiki:
* http://selforganizingteams.com

Workshop description:
* http://www.xp2004.de/xp2004/workshops/w02.pdf

'''Background'''

"The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-
organizing teams," argues the Agile Manifesto.

Yet the opposite principle is built into the corporate model of 
collaboration: "someone has to be boss" - sometimes to the extent of 
attempting to mandate self-organization! Self-organization cannot be 
decreed from above, but conditions can be created which favor it; one 
such condition is that team members have experience with and can 
recognize self-organization. Drawing on lessons from the theatre, 
this workshop will provide just such an experience, as well as  
explore the conditions of self-organization.

'''Objectives'''

Participants and presenters will
* learn about the conditions under which self-organization can be expected
* experience achieving a purpose without the need for a leader's direction
* generalize and extract insights from their own and each other's experience
* have fun!

'''Submissions and participation'''

Workshop attendance is limited to 20 participants, on a first-come,
first-served basis. To attend, simply list your name on the workshop
Wiki, within that limit.

Participants are invited to submit a position paper in the form of a 
page on the workshop Wiki,  however this is not a requirement for 
attendance. Our intent is to have the Wiki support a pre-workshop 
conversation to identify issues of interest.    

'''Organizers'''

 LaurentBossavit (Exoftware)
 EmmanuelGaillot (Independent)
