Is this a WikiSquatting advertisement? Candidate for deletion?

''It contains a copyright notice. I think that makes it WikiSquatting. If it can't be edited, it can't be wiki.''
Please read it more carefully. It says that the original was copyrighted, but that the author posted it here with the understanding that it can be changed. ''That understanding should be written expressly by the author.'' Done!

Also the man he is not with a big publisher. He need a little push, a little help (JD)

----

'''Simple Project Management: What Everyone in Your Organization Needs to Know About Project Management'''

This book provides twelve major '''Project Management Patterns''' and variety of smaller ones. The table of contents is available at: http://www.SimpleProjectManagement.com/service/book.toc.html The '''Scope Pattern''' ScopePattern is taken from one of the chapters.

Project management knowledge is vital to organizations of all sizes because organizations must be able to implement changes effectively. The project is an organization's most potent tool for making changes.  

While many other books are available to help leaders in organizations to identify the changes that must be made, this book explains how to take those decisions and turn them into action. 

This book's power comes from its focus. It includes only those project management essentials that everyone involved with a project needs to know. It explains them simply so everyone can understand and apply them. 

''''Who needs the book?'''

''New project managers'' will appreciate this book because it explains where to start and what to do. It is small enough to be kept in hand. By reviewing a section whenever a few minutes are available the principles described here will soon become an  automatic part of your behavior.

''Experienced project managers''  will value this book for three reasons: 
 
* You may discover a blind spot in your knowledge of the essentials of project management. Even the best project managers may discover something new here. 
* You know that project management is done by the team, not just by the manager. If everyone on the team has this information, the whole team can be more effective. Unfortunately we can't all be experts in project management, but there is a core of project management knowledge that all team members can and should have. 
* You are responsible for training the next generation of project managers. When all of the team members are learning what the project manager must do and why it must be done, they are also preparing themselves to serve as project managers in the future. 

''Managers of project managers''  will appreciate this book because it tells you what to expect from your project managers. It will help you guide your project  managers to greater effectiveness.

''Executives''  who understand that organizations implement change via projects will want every team to have this information. You know that the ability to successfully implement change determines the life or death of the organization. You will appreciate the fact that it is a small, selective book. You  know how hard it is to get everyone in the organization on the same page. You know that people are more likely to read and understand all of a small book than all  of a large one. 

''Customers of project managers''  will appreciate this book because it tells you how to work with your project managers. It will help you to make sure you get results, not just effort,  from your project teams.

''Everyone who works in a organization''  will want to know this because it shows what needs to be done for important changes to be implemented. With this knowledge you can always be part of the solution. You will be able to help your organization adapt.

'''How to use the book.'''

Project management contains more vital components than can be easily kept in the front of people's minds. It works most effectively when it becomes part of the background, our common vocabulary and automatic behavior. This little book serves as a constant reminder of what everyone on the project needs to do. By sharing this information with team members, customers, and management you can streamline communication and help everyone to work together more effectively. 

Take advantage of the book. Carry it with you. Review a section when you have a few minutes. Follow the directions it provides. Share copies of this book with your  team members, customers, management, and anyone else you think would benefit. Let it help you teach them what they need to know about project management. Use it in team meetings. Pick a topic and review that topic in the context of the current  project. Use it to help explain your actions to your management and to your customer.

'''Where to find the book?'''

The book can be purchased from the web site: http://www.SimpleProjectManagement.com/service/book.html

'''This page started as an excerpt from the above web site that is Copyright 2004 by Brian Christensen. It was posted here by the author with the understanding that it can be changed by anyone who wishes to change it.'''

More information project management patterns is available at: http://www.SimpleProjectManagement.com/think/patterns.html
----
CategoryBook CategoryProjectManagement