SOPIs and ex-SOPIs: nights out in Reigate this Crimbo: just click "Edit Text" below to add comments etc., then enter the code that will be displayed above in the box and click Save.

LAD'S BEER AND CURRY NIGHT

Lads beer and curry night I'm a definite for - PP

Phil and Paul P suggest sometime in w/c 10th Dec: suggestions?

You may recall that I will be on holiday for the rest of the month... I can suggest a night out in Margarita Island (will be there between 16th and 20th), how does that sound? Ivan

Colin T here, merry christmas to you all, I would like to suggest delaying the festivities to w/c 17th Dec (i am not around next week), I can see that is not great for Ivan but he will be on holiday so I am sure he will get over it.  If you can delay it to that week I promise to get drunker than Phil!

Phil here again (12th Dec): Colin can't make it this week, and Paul and I have our work do on Wed 19. I can't make Wed 19, Thu 20 or Fri 21 I'm afraid. Best day for me is Tue 18.

12th Dec - SRP
18th could be tough for me what about 20th...(I now you can't make it Phil) - but what about you others fancy two night on the bounce :> 

Chris [Rance] off the bench at the last minute, I can do Weds 19th and Thurs 20th and tues 18th already in Reigate for team do at 6:30. Let me know, but don't plan anything around me as still need to get clearnce for take-off, and air traffic control is on strike at the moment...........long story

Tom Falk here. Slightly radical, but how about delaying to Jan when everything is less busy and find a Friday night when everyone around, although make sure we do it before Ivan gets back from holiday !!!!!

PP again - how about this Saturday 15th for beer n ruby?

Paul Nich here: I am going to be in London this weekend (15th & 16th) and was wondering if you fancied meeting up for a few beers Saturday afternoon / evening. I should be in London around 2 ish and so could get out to Reigate for about 3 or 4 in the afetrnoon for few beers and aomething to eat if anyone is up for it. I would have also sent the e-mail to Sean but I cannot get into my hotmail account at work to retrieve his e-mail address, so if one of you could forward it on to me i would much appreciate it.

pp again - I can do this Saturday 15th for a few beers n ruby, sean email adress is [Sean.Pardon@unilever.com]

Sean P:
15th, 18th, 19th or 21st ?

OPEN NIGHT (TO PARTNERS ETC.) 

Sean and Phil considering Sat 29th (NO GOOD NOW - SEE BELOW). Paul P checking this with Rachel.  If Colin T is around he would like to come, particularly if any of you can provide a suitable partner!

SEAN P here - I'm easy for the Lads beer n ruby ! Can't do the 29th Dec as the outlaws are visiting...from 29th to New Year !

Phil Here: How about Friday 28th then? I need to check it, but could be a goer?

Paul here: Friday 28th should be OK for us still checking with the boss, I'll get my black book out and see if I can russle up a suitable partner for Mr T.

Phil again: 28th not too good for me I'm afraid as it's likely to be the evening we arrive back in Reigate.

Me again SRP - between Christmas and New Year may be a bit difficult as we're also coming back on the 28th from Norwich. Maybe, the partner thing could wait until 2008 ! There's never anything to do in Jan anyway then if CT gets lucky at a New Year's party he'll not be green a hairy...well not green anyway...

PP again - how about this Saturday 15th for beer n ruby?