"Darth Vader Strikes Back"

There's going to be an extra scene included in the 
DVD release of EMPIRE STRIKES BACK coming up next year! Basically, it expands 
on the scene where Vader reveals his fatherhood to Luke, and ties up some loose 
ends created with the release of Episode 1...

The Empire Strikes Back: 
Extra-Special Edition

INT: BESPIN GANTRY - MOMENTS LATER:

A furious lightsaber duel is underway. DARTH VADER is backing LUKE SKYWALKER towards the end of the 
gantry. A quick move by Vader chops off Luke's saber-hand! It goes spinning off into 
the ventilation shaft. Luke backs away. He looks around, but realizes there's 
nowhere to go but straight down.

Darth Vader: Obi Wan never told you 
what happened to your father.

Luke: He told me enough! He told me you 
killed him!

Darth Vader: No... I am your father!

Luke: No, it's not true! It's 
impossible.

Darth Vader: Search your feelings... you know it to be true...

Luke:  NO!

Darth Vader: Yes, it is true... and you know what else? You know that brass 
droid of yours?

Luke: Threepio?

Darth Vader: Yes... Threepio... I built 
him...when I was 7 years old...

Luke: No...

Darth Vader: Seven years old? And 
what have you done? Look at yourself, no hand, no job, and couldn't even 
levitate your own ship out of the swamp...

Luke: I destroyed your precious Death Star!

Darth Vader: When you were 20!  When I was 10, I single-handedly 
destroyed a Trade Federation Droid Control ship!

Luke: Well, it's not my 
fault...

Darth Vader: Oh, here we go... "Poor me...my father never gave me 
what I wanted for my birthday... boo hoo, my daddy's the Dark Lord of the 
Sith...waahhh wahhh!"

Luke: Shut up...

Darth Vader: You're a slacker! By the 
time I was your age, I had exterminated the Jedi knights!

Luke: I used to race 
my T-16 through Beggar's Canyon

Darth Vader: Oh, for the love of the Emperor...10 years old, winner of the Boonta Eve Open... Only human to ever fly a Pod Racer... right here, baby!

Luke looks down the shaft. Takes a 
step towards it.

Darth Vader: And at your age, I'd made out with a member of the Senate who ''wasn't'' also my sister.

Luke gets a confused look on his face.

Darth Vader: I was wrong... You're not my kid...I don't know 
whose you are, but you sure ain't mine...

Luke takes a step off the platform, hesitates, then plunges down the shaft. Darth Vader looks after him.

Darth Vader: Get a haircut!   

Luke shouting back from the shaft - his voice is fading - : at least I don't use a respiratory machine to make me sound like JamesEarlJones!!!

----

http://www.geekstir.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/11/vadergf.jpg

----

There's also the Jerry Springer episode: http://www.netfunny.com/rhf/jokes/99/May/springjedi.html

----

CategoryJoke