Hello, I'm Steve, and I'm new to this Wiki thing. I am still a bit of a skeptic, but I am always one to give new things a try.

I'm an IT Specialist, and enjoy programming as a hobby as well. In my employment, I am involved in writing workflow/financial reports in ASP, SQL Server, VB, Crystal Reports, PHP and Perl. I'm also responsible for everything else technologically-oriented within my company. I'm also an avid Linux user and enjoy programming in many other languages in my spare time, especially C/C++ and Java.

-----
AdviceToNewcomers

-----
Are you a programmer?

''Yes, why?''

Make a page with your name, tell us more about you and welcome! You have to be a programmer or to be involved in programming somehow.

''Do you mean that you have to be a programmer to post here?''

Yes, the subjects are related to programming. (Of course, no-one insists you are a programmer, but it does help a lot.)

''This Wiki concept is quite bizarre. I happened to stumble upon it a few months ago while playing around with Mambo, and decided to take a closer look tonight while I was bored. This Wiki stuff is really fascinating for those of us with short attention spans. With all of the links to different subjects embedded into each page, I find myself skipping from subject to subject while I'm reading... Maybe this is just the initial "shock" of the whole Wiki thing, though.''

''I first heard of Wiki through the documentation at http://www.mamboserver.com a few months ago. Their documentation system ''was'' wiki-based (I don't know if it still is.) At the time, I really didn't understand the concept, and didn't spend much time trying to. Since then, I've accidentally wound up browsing to a few Wiki sites while searching for other things. Finally, I just decided to find out what it was all about, and I typed "Wiki" into Google and wound up here.''

''I'm playing around with CaseyWest's short Perl Wiki - SigWik (I love those obfuscated programs!) right now. I can't get it to save my text, though... I think it is just a permissions problem.''

''Ahh.. just got it to work. Fascinating that such a tiny program could have so much functionality!!''

''Well, I'm off to bed. I've gotta stop myself or I'll never get any sleep tonight. Take care! Steve''

----
CategoryHomePage