Cathartic blues country rock band.

Lead singer: Jerry Garcia

Their greatest talent: They made their music psychologically addictive, on the manic side of a ManicDepression neurosis cycle. Specifically, traditional Blues music entertains you with the singer's troubles. GD music entices you to feel like you yourself are healing & recovering from some terrible grief.

----

''...TheGratefulDead took chances in every one of their 2nd sets over the 30 years. They could either be a big miss or hit the big one. When they hit the big one, their music transcended all musical boundaries and transported one somewhere. It became a religious experience or Dionysiac ritual. The brutal stereotypes exist: their fans smell, their all on drugs but that's crap. There were a lot of us professionals that neither did drugs or drinking (not a drop in the last 12 years) but were able to find something in those explorations to keep us coming back night after night hoping that this would be the night for one of their masterpieces. Their explorations actually were more rooted in jazz improvisation and that's why they played with Branford Marsalis and Ornette Coleman. Fans of TheGratefulDead included Peter Jennings, Walter Cronkite, Bill Clinton, and many others who regularly attended concerts. We found the music engaging, not depressing. They were one of the only bands that could go from a Merle Haggard song to a wild jazz-infested jam in seconds. That's why I own 2200 hours of live tapes.''

-- sg

Finally a place where I can agree 100% with everything Sam says! -- PeterMerel

''Oh, no!''

<tiny little guilty voice>Me too...</tiny little guilty voice> -- PCP

Ponder: IneedAterabyte

----

''...That's why I own 2200 hours of live tapes...''

I'm sure they have a large collection of songs. But is there ''that'' much variation? I'm somewhat obsessive about bands I like and will collect live versions, remixes, and whatever else the band has done. But not 2200 hours.

Yes, there is actually a huge variation. 1974 GD is a whole together different band than 1977, than 1980, etc. The GD adapted and changed many times. In 1974 they were a jazz fusion band for instance. In 1972, they were a psychedelic space band. In 1977, they were a straightahead rock band. It don't matter. I'm on a Led Zeppelin kick now (and Metallica).

-- sg

''...That's why I own 2200 hours of live tapes...''

Woah! -- RobertDiFalco

Suppose Sam could start a Web radio station instead of keeping them all to himself? -- PCP

''Second that.'' -- PM

I'd third that, however, I don't have good enough net access anywhere to listen. Perhaps if he'd put them up as MP3s.

''Unfortunately, I only have 56K dialup access at home. I'm be glad to help people out. How do you convert cassettes to MP3?''

-- sg

Sam, this is LaunchCast. LaunchCast, this is Sam.

----

Some favorite GD songs...

	* ''Monkey and the Engineer'': Jesse Fuller on live acoustic RECKONING (April 1, 1981) -- SG
		* The one where the engineer dies and his pet monkey takes over the train and drives its route.
	* ''Salt Lake City''
		* I believe it's just called "Salt Lake City", and was only played a few times. I have it on a couple of tapes. -- SG
	* ''Man Smart, Women Smarter'', a cover of a Harry Bellafonte song that Bob Weir brought into the band. -- SG
	* ''Ripple'' by Hunter & Garcia.

	* ''Dark Star'', the ultimate exploration vehicle, could go 5-60 minutes.

	* ''Playing in the Band''

	* ''Victim or the Crime''

	* ''Truckin''

	* ''Uncle John's Band''

Anyone know a good lyrics database for them??

''Ask and you shall receive :-). You have to start being nice to me now, especially since I know your secret obsession ''[My secret obsession is to hear them cutting up Mormons]''. Who wouldn't thunk? The Answer is, drumroll please... The Annotated Grateful Dead Lyrics: a Web Site, http://arts.ucsc.edu/gdead/agdl, done by David Dodd, a friend of mine from the Well days.''

-- sg

You were on Well?? [TheWell's legendary status subdues me.] -- PCP

''Ripple, one of the most meaningful songs I know by Hunter/Garcia:''

 If my words did glow with the gold of sunshine
 And my tunes were played on the harp unstrung
 Would you hear my voice come through the music
 Would you hold it near as it were your own?

 It's a hand-me-down, the thoughts are broken 
 Perhaps they're better left unsung
 I don't know, don't really care 
 Let there be songs to fill the air

(Chorus)

 Ripple in still water
 When there is no pebble tossed
 Nor wind to blow 


 Reach out your hand if your cup be empty
 If your cup is full may it be again
 Let it be known there is a fountain
 That was not made by the hands of men 


 There is a road, no simple highway
 Between the dawn and the dark of night
 And if you go no one may follow 
 That path is for your steps alone

(Chorus) 

 You who choose to lead must follow
 But if you fall you fall alone
 If you should stand then who's to guide you?
 If I knew the way I would take you home
-- sg

The Canadian reggae musician AndruBranch has a very well-reviewed cover of Ripple. See http://andrubranch.tripod.com/
----
OffTopic