When you were born, you didn't come with an owner's manual; these guidelines make life work better.

	1. You will receive a body. You may like it or hate it, but it's the only thing you are sure to keep for the rest of your life.
	1. You will learn lessons. You are enrolled in a full-time informal school called "Life on Planet Earth". Every person or incident is the Universal Teacher.
	1. There are no mistakes, only lessons. Growth is a process of experimentation. "Failures" are as much a part of the process as "success."
	1. A lesson is repeated until learned. It is presented to you in various forms until you learn it -- then you can go on to the next lesson.
	1. If you don't learn easy lessons, they get harder. External problems are a precise reflection of your internal state. When you clear inner obstructions, your outside world changes. Pain is how the universe gets your attention.
	1. You will know you've learned a lesson when your actions change. Wisdom is practice. A little of something is better than a lot of nothing.
	1. "There" is no better than "here". When your "there" becomes a "here" you will simply obtain another "there" that again looks better than "here."
	1. Others are only mirrors of you. You cannot love or hate something about another unless it reflects something you love or hate in yourself.
	1. Your life is up to you. Life provides the canvas; you do the painting. Take charge of your life -- or someone else will.
	1. You always get what you want. Your subconscious rightfully determines what energies, experiences, and people you attract -- therefore, the only foolproof way to know what you want is to see what you have. There are no victims, only students.
	1. There is no right or wrong, but there are consequences. Moralizing doesn't help. Judgments only hold the patterns in place. Just do your best.
	1. Your answers lie inside you. Children need guidance from others; as we mature, we trust our hearts, where the Laws of Spirit are written. You know more than you have heard or read or been told. All you need to do is to look, listen, and trust.
	1. You will forget all this.
	1. You can remember any time you wish.

(From the book "If Life is a Game, These are the Rules" by Cherie Carter-Scott)

-----
I ran across this quote posted on the web at http://www.krcl.org/rules.html ''(BrokenLink 2005-05-08)'', a local radio station. I won't recast them here, but they are worth thinking over.
-----
Look what happens when you don't recast things here!

404 Not Found
The requested URL /rules.ht was not found on this server.

http://www.worldtrans.org/spir/ruleshuman.html