I'm trying to find witty quotations to head each of the chapters in my thesis ''An algebraic theory of Software Interfaces''. Feel free to suggest quotes on these subjects:

...


Here are the quotes from my Thesis chapters, and some I discarded. Maybe you'll find some of the quotes or authors useful. Actually, some of them are pretty cheesy. :-) BTW: my thesis describes on a model of interaction for distributed components, a language that can be used to describe interactions that fit the model, analysis of interactions for protocol errors and the runtime support for interactions between colocated and distributed components.

	For the introduction::	"The last thing that we find in making a book is to know what we must put first." -- BlaisePascal

	For the literature survey::	"I may not agree with what you say, but I'll defend to the death your right to say it." -- MrVoltaire

	For a chapter describing a model of component interaction::	"My own view is that we have been wrong in taking communication as secondary. Many people seem to assume as a matter of course that there is, first, reality, and then, second, communication about it." -- Raymond Williams

	For a chapter describing a language to describe component interactions that can be mechanically analysed for protocol errors::	"Get the habit of analysis - analysis will in time enable synthesis to become your habit of mind." -- Frank Lloyd Wright

	For a chapter describing the runtime of that language::	"Never worry about theory as long as the machinery does what it's supposed to do." -- Robert A. Heinlein

	For a chapter describing the design of an on-line record store as a case study::	"Since Aristotle [MrAristotle]... the main emphasis in [man's] language... has been on the identification of objects rather than on the relationships between objects." -- The 13th Floor Elevators (a cult 60's rock band)

	For a chapter describing a componentised transport protocol framework::	"Nothing is particularly hard if you divide it into small jobs." -- Henry Ford

	Performance evaluation of the runtime::	"Never promise more than you can perform." -- Publilius Syrus

	Conclusions and further work::	"Problems worthy of attack / Prove their worth by hitting back." -- Piet Hein

----
You can't go past the EpigramsInProgramming by AlanPerlis. At least, I didn't. -- JamesNoble