Not too long ago I had an unexpected visit. I was sitting in a room with some friends. When suddenly the room seemed different, as if the light changed, as if the walls were not solid and yet I could not put my finger on what was different. It was as if the world was fading like a dream.

Then in an instant everything was very different as I noticed, I was alone and very much not alone. There was One standing very near, too near, and not near enough. His presence changed everything; even before He spoke, I was moved to great excitement and fear.

I was afraid I might not say the right thing or that I might not be thinking the right things. I knew who He was because He had visited me before. This Jesus has crashed my party a few times, and each time- the presence of His God - hurt me and loved me, changed me, convicted me, embraced me, taught me, killed me and raised me back to life with each moment He was near.

And then, He began to speak. His words were like fire and nourishment. They changed me from inside out and outside in. They searched my mind and heart and made me able to see the meaning of the words. They had the power not just to express, but also to enable the hearer to understand. They were so alive that I knew I could live off the glory of them. It was as if they, the words, were all doorways into unseen dimensions.

My heart burned as he spoke, I not only understood the message but felt His heart and longing for the glorious fellowship of His people. Jesus seemed to desire our love more than any bridegroom in history has desired his bride. The desire He has for us is able to move creation and to affect all those who draw near.

Jesus told me how much He loved His people. He told me how much He had for them, if they would just come to Him. The promises of heaven are for now, the promise of freedom, of fellowship with God, of Joy, peace, and purity. My people are waiting for an event for the kingdom to come but I have given them all things pertaining to my kingdom and access to the Father.

He was gone just as fast as he arrived and left me with his words of life. He has told us that if we will draw near, these fellowship experiences are available to all of us. We dont need to wait for Jesus to meet us we can have His words burn in us today have the Spirit of God be the teacher in our lives, have the Father make His Word manifest. These are not to be special encounters for just a few believers but daily fellowship and the normal Christian life.

He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me: and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will '''manifest myself to him. '''
----

Discussion moved to TheVisitationDiscussion, TVD moved to WhyClublet, then why died.

CategoryWorldView ''CategoryBecauseIGotHigh maybe?''