	 :	It is said an Eastern monarch once charged his wise men to invent him a sentence to be ever in view, and which should be true and appropriate in all times and situations. They presented him the words: 'And this, too, shall pass away.' How much it expresses! How chastening in the hour of pride! How consoling in the depths of affliction!

-- AbrahamLincoln

''What more needs to be said'' 
 Yagni
-----

During the ceremony surrounding the election of a new Pope, bundles of tow are burned in front of the new pontiff with the words "sic transit gloria mundi", ''so passes the glory of the world''.

During a Roman General's Triumph (his big parade through Rome), a slave stood behind him in his chariot whispering "You too are mortal".

----

"To every thing there is a season, and time for every purpose under the heaven" -- BookOfEcclesiastes

----

And The Byrds add a musical aesthetic to the ancient, and therefore "intellectually suspect" revelation to make it pertinent.  

The Sabi might Wabi after all.
I own lower life forms for pets. Cats, dogs and turtles 
And All of them eats other stuff.  Just like all of us.
  
The Gadget describes everything.  
What are the properties of the Unknown Object?  
Let the "them" describe it, like it is in nature, 
If there is such a thing as nature.

Prose comes to mind, Dr. Wabi.  
How can my program seem to Sabi?



A methodology to describe all The Universes is a matter of disk space, now isn't it?  Plus asking all the questions.  Wabi-ing and or Sabi-ing reflects itself in your eyes.  I can't read the symbols another language uses to describe a concept.  The concept never existed in the first place, as far as we can understand.  That's probably Wabi, there might be a Sabi secretly involved.  Life is a bunch of what's, maybe's and if's. You think?  Wabi this, Sabi that, Wabi Sabi the rest.  And, when you're ready, watch Jerry Springer to be glad you ain't them knowing your Wabi Sabis well.

Conjugation of verbs leads too

I am

You are

He, she, it is

We are

They are

You are

All God's Childrens am.

Where's my Wabi?
It's in the not knowing,
Now isn't it?

But describing reality is my job,
As a programmed programmer.
Needing to wrestle a Gadget

Sleepy
    I am=True


Or Sponge Bob may be the way.

Infinity Exists to the Yin and Yangth power. 
----