"DoOrDoNot, there is no try" --Yoda

----

Here's a lecture on putting yourself out of the "try" space and into the "do" space:

'''Creating A Blueprint From Your Imagination'''

Q:  Hello.

B:  And to you, good day.

Q:  As I told the channel earlier, I am representing myself and
someone else. So it's her question that I'll ask you first.

B:  Yes.

Q:  Her name is Adrian, and she's been trying very, very, hard for
the
last year to make a job transition. She wants to become a TV news
writer.

B:  Oh, all right.  

Q:  And she does have some limited experience, but she wants to
get a
more permanent job in that industry.

B:  Oh, all right. Is that what is most exciting thing to that
being? 

Q:  Yes.

B:  Is that being acting like a TV news writer? Or is she still
acting
like someone who is trying to become a TV news writer? There is a
vast
difference in those attitudes. 

Q:  Well, she's going to hear this. I'm afraid she's going to kill
me
for saying this, but it's the truth. Yah, she's. I won't tell her
there's a videotape of this. I believe she's still acting like
she's
trying to be.

B:  All right. This, in no way, shape or form, is a condemnation
or a
blame. The idea simply is a matter of fact that your society has
created so many definitions that sometimes they seem to be what
you
are doing; when in fact the definition you are doing is not
anything
like what you say you prefer.

You think it is, because you think it's attached. But it is its
own
definition, that really has very little to do with the thing you
actually want to be. All the trying in the world is not the doing
of
the thing. When you finally do something, it's because you finally
did
it, not because you tried to do it.

All the trying, usually, is simply the time you think or believe
is
necessary to allow yourself to really believe you can finally do
it.
The idea, therefore - to put it in very simple terms - is that
your
friend may simply not be paying attention to the fact that there
may
be many opportunities she is not allowing herself to take
advantage
of, because she does not necessarily think herself capable of
acting
on those opportunities. Because she is not yet the person she
wants to
be.

But the only way she'll be that person is by starting to act like
that
person now, by doing the things that person would do. By being
that
person. As we have shared many times - and again this will be
brief -
the idea is to use the imagination as a tool in the following way.

If there is something you want to be that you believe you're not
now,
create the visualization of that person. See the you you want to
be,
and then see that you acting in the way you want to act, doing the
things you prefer to do. Then connect with it, with all your
senses.
Feel what it would be like to be that person.

Taste, smell, hear, and touch everything! And have the attitude of
what it would be like to be that person. Have the style of that
person. Do things in the way that person would do them, not in the
way
you're doing it now. Then all you have to do, if there is any
circumstance or situation in your life that you don't know how to
handle as the you you are now, hand that circumstance and
situation to
the you in your imagination, in your visualization, in your
picture.
Give that situation - hand it over - to the person you prefer to
be,
that you have created yourself to be, in your image of yourself.

Then watch what that person does with it. See how their attitude
is
different from yours; see how they handle it successfully. See
their
boldness and their conviction. See the excitement and the gusto
with
which they do that idea. See them successfully transform it. Then
do
what they did, and you'll get the same result.

That's what your imagination is for: to create a mirror image of
the
you you prefer to be, and then have the boldness and the
conviction to
act like that you, and you will create the same vibration. You
will
get the same life style, you will get the same result. That's how
to
use your imagination as a blueprint, as a template, in that way. 

But it takes a boldness and a conviction, and a willingness to
understand that as soon as you conceive of that image, that is who
you
are. All you have to do is act like it to get the same results. If
there is anything, any habit pattern, any attitudinal approach
that
you would be doing differently if you already were that person -
differently than the way you are doing it now - do it the way you
would do it if you already were that person, and you will be that
person.

What you put out is what you get back. 

Q:  Thank you.

B:  Individuals - always, always, always - are a 100% energy. No
more,
no less. If you are doing something that you really want to do
50%,
and something you do no prefer 50%, you cannot expect any further
manifestation of the thing you really want to do, more than 50%.
It's
simple mathematics.

If you are hanging on to something just to play it safe, to have
something to fall back on - just in case - then you are not really
trusting the you you say you prefer to be. You are not really
putting
100% of the idea in the direction of the flow you want. I
guarantee as
soon as anyone does, you will get it; if you believe you are ready
for
it. That's another idea.

All it takes is an examination, as we have already done to some
degree. But now I will put it in its original linear form: What is
the
clear intention? What is the clear definition of what you want?
What
is the clear desire? Do you really want it? What is the clear
deservability? Do you believe you deserve to get it?

If all of those are clear, then act with clear action upon
whatever
opportunities present themselves that excite you the most at any
given
moment - whether they appear connected to what you want or not.
The
excitement tells you they are, and they will get you where you
need to
go. That's it.

Q:  Thank you.

B:  Thank you.

----

"The more I want to get something done, the less I call it work."
     - RichardBach, Author

----
''I agree with the idea that if you want to change who you are, you have to act on it, not just think about it or wish for it or imagine it.  I disagree that it's as simple as described.  In many cases it requires a lot of work plus access to resources such as money, education and opportunities to advance.  Sometimes it depends on characteristics that not everyone has.  It doesn't matter how much you want to be an Olympic gymnast if you have a poor sense of balance.''

''You should avoid using scientific terms such as "vibration" and "energy" in vague, non-scientific ways.  Such usage is often a red flag for pseudoscientific nonsense.''
