"ItWorks, but not like it could " DonaldNoyes.ThinkingOutLoud.20121024
----
It seems certain technologies are being implemented by an almost daily Updating and Refactoring of what it is, into "WhatItWantsToBe". Some such products are created and marketed, with the expectation of "we will have to fix some of it" to make it better, to optimize performance, or to "CatchUp". Particularly in products "rushed to market" to "stay ahead of the competition". Samsung in a recent tv commercial was showing off its product by intimating that it was ahead of the curve established by Apple in its recent release of Iphone5. It was capped off by a Samsung user's parents taking the place held in a line of future Apple users, and a tapping of two Samsung devices together to exchange playlist. As the fully satisfied Samsung user (who had abandoned Apple) was walking away, one of those waiting in line was heard to say "When will we have that ''Tapping thing'' they had just witnessed. (Next time!)

We are living in a time in which things are becoming more complex, smaller, more feature rich, while expanding in scope during generations which are measured in periods of 12 to 24 months. Designed within current products is a space for capabilities to be expanded by developers and users as well as the support and updating staff of the product's producers. On WardsWiki, much is made of this technique in the making of extreme and agile products by including in the design the capability and structure which allows for refactoring and updating in intervening periods. 

Skill sets are quickly made antique by the rapid innovations of new machines, processes and techniques. What use to work, is quickly made to become slower, less efficient and far less capable and easy to use as are the "latest and greatest". The "next big thing" has arrived as the last one has been readied for release and distribution. 

What has come to be is that one must be constantly "learning" to fit into the modern and contemporary marketplace. The fourteen year old youth of today will in 5 to 8 years be doing 150% of what you are now doing and in half or one quarter of the time. This will take place while using only one thumb or a thumb and forefinger and later by simple gestures or digitized vocalizations uwing on a device sized to fit the user's palm or worn as clothing. The display taking place within the sensory framework of one or both eyes. This is a present possibility and will almost certainly become a reality in the "near" future.

----
CategoryFuture 