Maybe it's happened. ScriptKiddies have decided that their pages won't be touched, won't be changed, won't be deleted, and they will force them to remain. Thermonuclear war has erupted on WardsWiki, and we're about to see the screaming hordes, all be they just a few, screw it up for the rest of us. I'm glad I saw this wiki before this happened.

I hope I'm wrong, but when someone sets a robot running why should they ever bother to stop it?

Perhaps posts to the wiki need to have a robot-resistant confirmation, such as reading a number from an image (bad example, but one possibility) to prevent robots from posting. Other suggestions welcome.

''What's wrong with using a distorted image to resist robot edits?''

[Doesn't work with text-only browsers, which are known to be in use here (and should be assumed in any case due to general UI principles of accessibility). There needs, at minimum, to be a second text-only solution.]

Bahhh, the equivalentsy off grafix deestortioning ist kristal. Generalist, remember?

:-)
----
The lasting population of Wiki Participants here are guided by principles of responsibility, courtesy and discrimination. Most do not view pages as territory to be staked, claimed and defended at all costs. When some one or few involve themselves in such care-less-ness, those who have been, still are, and will be here to participate in honest collaboration and discussion just continue to be about their business regardless, setting their agendas and reading habits not by RecentChanges but by a considered, directed approach to topics which make up the vast majority of pages here. (The NobleExperiment continues).

----

Years ago when I first started reading, and then a few months later when I started editing, a few people I know told me that they weren't bothering with the wiki anymore because it simply wasn't as good as it used to be. I didn't understand and couldn't believe them. I couldn't see how it could have ever been better.

Now I understand. Now I can see the results being hinted at by the noble experiment. Don't misunderstand me, the experiment is worth doing, the current artifact is worth having, but for me, the evidence is now compelling. Despite the continuing efforts of the valiant WikiGnome''''''s, the ''average quality is declining''.

* Ok ''The average quality'' has declined. It has to. I would say even the greatest thinkers who have contributed to this Wiki would probably not be able to match their own previous contributions. It is a reflection of the decline in society as we have remembered. The "best" people has been affected, sometimes indirectly, by the decline in quality of interactions they had with people around them. The more prevalent is the media, the lesser is the quality of interaction. Quality comes about when people spend more time doing SelfTalk, before their message is formulated to be shared. So SocietyWithoutMediaIsBetter because the yield curve is now going down instead of up. -- dl

To some extent that doesn't matter. SusannahWilliams said it very well on WikiSucks:

	 :	''Surely the point is if you feel that way about wiki, do something about it. Start some new topics, avoid legal threats and stuff that bot wars get involved in and go back to HappyWiki where life is peaceful and utopian. There are over 28,000 pages out there; you're bound to find something good. Don't create new pages for the sake of creating (or delete for the same reason) create something you '''truly''' think would be valuable and if it doesn't survive, admit you were wrong and go read something else. Same for deleting if you delete something that re-appears, stop yourself from getting angry about that person's challenge of your judgment and appreciate that it's there because clearly someone else wants to read it. Then just leave it at that. Move on find something fun and enjoyable to read/write - wiki is a big place. -- SusannahWilliams''

The pace of life has changed and maybe now I'm just caught up in the "it was better in my day" type of remembering, even though it's only been 6 years. I will keep trying to find pages worth reading, I will keep trying to add material of value, I will simply move on if someone deletes my pages.

I say this though - if you really do feel that what you said has value and was worth contributing, it's hard to watch someone else distort or delete it without apparent care, concern, thought or appreciation.