'''VimKi''' is presently an '''alpha''' implementation of a PersonalWiki using the VimTextEditor. It uses Vim's native scripting language to jump between WikiWord''''''s (Vim tags) and to create new pages. I was not looking for a product to share content on the web, but something I could use to enhance my tendency to use '''Vim''' for most text editing. I wanted to add links between pages, and I wanted to use a simple syntax for text markup.

My original intent for this tool is to have a private set of files linked together via tags for easy navigation. I picked a wiki approach because it is supposed to be more writer-centric. This is not a true-Wiki because it does not mean to have web-sharable files and collaborative input. It creates local files for individual use.

I should say that I'm starting to drift toward using PmWiki. Why? It comes with a perl script '''pmwe''' that allows you to edit wiki pages (true wiki in that they are web-accessible and editable) using your favorite editor (my case, Vim). However, this still requires a network connection to the web-server. It also has Emacs support.

'''Homepage'''
http://www.dausha.net/index.php/Technical/VimKi


This includes screenshots and access to the source code.

----

'''Discussion'''

----

After downloading and copying the files, I just do not know how to do? 
How can I generate HTML files from those *.vimki files?
thanks.

Yajun

''I got sidetracked and didn't finish experimenting with this, but I believe the point is to generate plain text files, not html, which are then primarily used only by you yourself. A personal note-taking pseudo-wiki. The files of course could be put in a directory that is web-accessible (often ~/public_html for Apache), but that would be secondary. There certainly is no way to use this to allow other people to edit files across the Web, so it's not quite the usual kind of wiki.''

----

Looks potentially very interesting. A little tutorial or something would be helpful; I'm an expert in vi but not so much with the extended vim features, so I'm finding the source code slow-going to understand.

* Good point. I plan on doing that soon. 

----

This uses VIM, not VI, because the former has color-based syntax highlighting. This gives me the visual clues I need to tell a '''bold''' from an ''italic'' (But, I added * and _, so as if the * and _ weren't enough). So, I'm sorry, pulling a Vimki file up in a DOS text editor will not give this justice.


----

I'd like to use VimKi...
this link seems to be broken : http://www.dausha.net/vimki.tbz2

mail : kemuchi AT altern DOT org
K.

(FIXED link) Ben

----
Also see another vim type VimViki at

http://www.vim.org/scripts/script.php?script_id=861

----
I'm having trouble getting anywhere past your home page (http://www.dausha.net). I'm trying to get to the Technical section to read about VimKi and am being prompted for a login. Any help? Thanks!

(ejusino-=at=-gmail.com)

----
I downloaded a version of vimki a while back, sometime around the first of this year, and have been using it since then to maintain personal notes (not web accessible) about what I'm doing at work.  Vimki is working great for that.

On one of the pages in the distribution, Ben mentions that on his to-do list is to add a back link from pages created or linked to back to the referrer.  I implemented something that does this.

I also, instead of creating tags with vim, created some rules for ctags to use to create and update the tags file.  It works better, in my opinion.

I don't have Ben's email address, so I'm posting here to let everyone know that you can get the changes that I've made from here: http://www.angelfire.com/linux/skip/Articles/VimkiChanges.html

--
Skip
 
-----
CategoryWikiImplementation
