A reference to a skit on MysteryScienceTheater 3000 where Joel teaches how to create New Age music:

	JOEL:	Oh, hiya, Crow. And that. 
	CROW:	Oh, hi. Whatcha doin? 
	JOEL:	Oh, we were just inspired by the new age music of this movie, so we decided to use the wall of keyboards to make our own great new age music. You Wanna help? 
	CROW:	Sure, uh, what can I do? 
	JOEL:	Well, I could teach you how to play the keyboards. 
	CROW:	Will it take long? 
	JOEL:	No, of course not, come on over here. Here, check this out. Okay, put your hand, ''come on'', put your hand over here. 
	CROW:	Okay 
	JOEL:	Put your finger down, see? 
	CROW:	Like that? 
	JOEL:	Yeah. See? ''{CROW: Ohhhh!}'' Yeah! You got it!  You're playing a new age chord now. Okay? Just like Yanni; all right, now, put another finger down, there. ''{CROW: Okay}'' See? Now you're playing like Yanni; Now, hold it down for an hour... 
	CROW:	Yeah? 
	JOEL:	Now hold it down until you get a record contract from Windham Hill.
	CROW:	Ohhh, hey cool! Servo, check it out: It's my new new-age Yanni lick. Uh, Joel, hold down my new new-age ''{JOEL: Okay}'' Yanni lick, I gotta put my ''{JOEL: Okay, got it.}'' sandwich down. This music's kind of dull, isn't it? 
	JOEL:	Yeah, but it's a good way to make a lot of money without a big initial investment. 
	TOM:	*ahem, ahem* Okay. And now, Music From Some Guys In Space. Tonight on Music From Some Guys In Space, more fine, new, new-age music and sounds from super progressive Bay Area new age keyboardist Joel Robinson. Joel will be accompanied on the wall of keyboards by veteran minimalist, Crow T. Robot. We invite you to sit back and enjoy more repetitive new age music, as we cruise the spacewaves. Come along, fellow travelers, and enjoy Music ... From ... Some Guys ... In ... Space. 

----
I should add some context.  I'm not sure if it's still on, but there was an American public radio show named ''Music from the Heart of Space''. [I'm not sure whether it was an NPR show or an APRN/PRI show.]  It specialized in new age music.  Of course, I think of that as N''''''ewAge music.  Rhymes with sewage.  --EricJablow
