The EjbFaq from Ibm

'''Webpage''' :http://www-4.ibm.com/software/webservers/appserv/

'''Link'''    :http://www-4.ibm.com/software/webservers/appserv/doc/troubleshooter/2tabcont.htm
----
'''Comments''':

''The first paragraph of the marketing text is perhaps the best example of opaque jargon-infected advertising copy I have read in days, outside of parody. --BillTozier''

Meaningless buzzwords and advertising hype highlighted.  I've left unhighlighted such buzzwords as actually describe what the project does:

	 :	IBM WebSphere Application Server is built on '''open, reusable technologies''' that '''leverage your existing resources, shorten development cycles and ease your administrative burden.''' The Standard Edition lets you use Java servlets, Java Server Pages and XML to quickly transform static Web sites into '''vital''' sources of dynamic Web content. The Advanced Edition is a '''high-performance''' EJB server for implementing EJB components that '''incorporate business logic.''' The Enterprise Edition integrates EJB and CORBA components to build '''high-transaction, high-volume''' e-business applications.

I think the problem may be just that they're trying to be too information dense.  I will concede that even I can't explain the first sentence :)  However, translation key attached for the rest:

''open, reusable technologies'' -- meaning we use things from Apache like the Apache Web Servier (The IBM HTTP Server is explicitly "powered by Apache") and Xerces and Xalan.

''high-performance'' -- IBM has spent a lot of time performance-tuning Websphere to ensure that it performs at least as well, if not better than its competitors (e.g. WebLogic, Oracle, Inprise, etc.)

''incorporate business logic'' -- meaning that you put your business logic (e.g code that does domain things) in EJB's rather than in your GUI front ends.

''high-transaction, high-volume'' -- meaning that EE includes ENCINA and CICS, which are used to build some of the world's biggest, fastest, TP systems, like those use by stock exchanges, banks and insurance companies.  I could give you numbers, but I'd have to shoot you :) [Clarification: WebSphere interoperates with CICS TS (an OS/390 product) via RMI/IIOP, but CICS TS is not packaged as part of EE/390.] [Actually, once upon a time, WAS EE on the Distributed platform DID ship with CICS for Distributed platforms in the box...]

KyleBrown
