My brain must be weird.

I prefer a dvorak keyboard, I can read and write EssExpressions, I found and find vegetarianism a lot easier than meat-eating, I sometimes dream in rhyme.

One thing happened that was among the weirdest - I woke up with some code in my head - C code, and I can barely write hello world, usually, so I opened Emacs and put my hands on the keyboard, and then almost fell asleep again, or at least it felt like that. When I came to I had the program in the buffer, so I saved it and compiled it. I think there was some off-by-one-error that segfaulted, but I know at least enough C to fix that bug. The program was a rather simple count up the numbers and zero-pad them ditty, not much more advanced than hello world.

The same process has repeated itself for poetry, song lyrics, lisp code and papers/essays for school.

I have difficulty telling the time using ordinary clocks and calendars. I often arrive at meetings one hour earlier or a couple of days later than the appointed time.

A hundred-line poem in rhyme and some sort of meter (well, all the lines had the same number of beats) also came in a dream. It was in english, my second language.

When I'm really tired, when I'm dizzy, these things just come out.

I write short stories in acrostic. I write awful letters to people that I find out about by looking in my outbox.

I lead a fairly interesting waking life but when I'm asleep it's a thousand times more.

Is this some weird, new age, reincarnation thing? That seems to be the most likely solution.

''Interesting dreams are one thing, but the rest sounds like a problem. Sounds like a biochemical imbalance of some sort. Vitamin deficiency is extremely common in vegetarians, and can lead to odd symptoms. Less often, same thing with amino acide imbalance or mineral deficiency. But it could be almost anything, not necessarily diet related. I'd see a doctor ASAP.''

This started long before I turned vegetarian. People tell me to see doctors but the doctors I've seen tell me not to worry, that it's nothing they know about.

----

I won't attempt to diagnose (I am not a doctor) but I have 
observed similar phenomena in people I've worked with in a
counseling capacity.

In all the cases of my experience neither the condition nor
the remedy were chemical.  The remedies were straightforward
and involved directed and directed physical communication
with one's environment.

Considering the very personal nature of this discussion, the
events, their causes, and any remedies really should be taken
off-line.

The greatest hazard here is that someone will tell you what
their opinion of your condition is, gets it wrong, and you
buy into that incorrect assessment.  Especially if the
conclusion involves chemicals.

''No one should be giving medical advice, in other words. Certainly. But when you say "should be taken off-line", it is hard to believe you didn't suggest a particular venue in which to find "directed physical communication
with one's environment"; what kinds of professionals could offer that to him if he's interested? S/He said s/he'd already talked to doctors (presumably general practitioners). I never heard of this directed communication thingie, myself.''
----
This sounds similar to the events that produced PolyannaLanguage.