WhatWeCanDoNow? 

This is a page which has the intention to suggest what we as Citizens can do - '''Right now''' to provide context for solutions to our present dilemma. 

Here is a list for starters: 

I can suggest first of all that all rhetoric concerning this difficult situation be toned down and that non-polarizing statements and suggestions be offered. 

That the illegal actions of those who have violated the rights of citizens and those sheltered by our Constitution be properly assigned to those guilty of the act and not assigned to groups of people not guilty. 

The removal of hatred and violence toward individuals under the protection of our Constitution. 

Tolerance and new understanding for the religious views of all within this country (USA). 

The realization that we can provide support for those who have suffered great personal and family losses due to the terrible event that occurred September 11. That each of us can exercise personal responsibility for things which are under our own personal control. 

Support the President in the carrying out of his Constitutional duties. By whatever means are at our disposal (including any civic or religious responses appropriate to our beliefs). 

That each person seek education through discovery and dialogue to understand the meaning of citizenship, first to this country and then to citizenship in the world as a whole. 

What more would you add? 
----

Those are excellent starters. Personally, I think your last point about citizenship in the world is the key, specifically that world citizenship should supersede country citizenship. I feel global issues of this sort could be best resolved in the context of some kind of global government, or failing that, at least by international agencies such as the (currently non-existent) international criminal court. As has been pointed out elsewhere, this would necessitate a constitutional amendment on the part of the United States ceding some controlling authority to said international bodies. I fear the alternative will be continuing cycles of (thinly veiled) unilateral international action on the part of the United States, followed by terrorist "retaliation". -- AndyPierce 

I am not sure that a single person's action is involved - what you are suggesting requires a multinational effort, supported by a large number, if not the majority, of the citizens of all countries involved. 

----
What can an individual do now?

1) SeekFirstToUnderstand - Individualizing: - Understand first the situation or circumstance. Don't push ideas that do not fit the environment.