Processes such as construction, business management and software development present complex problems to which practitioners in these fields must apply solutions.

The solutions employed consist of "intellectual capital" owned by that practitioner. If she could encapsulate her intellectual capital in words, other practitioners in the same field might be able to use the experience to make more effective systems.

'' '''Therefore''' ''
Use a semi-rigid presentation format to encapsulate knowledge of working within a field of endeavour.

For a granular piece of knowledge or experience, express the problem which this knowledge solves, the context in which the knowledge solves the problem, and the solution which solves the problem in its context --MartinCosgrave

CategoryPatternLanguage 
----
So what do you all think? Have I got it largely right or largely wrong? --MartinCosgrave
-----
I think you have another case of something useful to say that does not fit the term 'pattern'.  If it were a pattern, then it would have recurred so many times in the last 5,000 years that patterns would be the standard form of literature.  But it was invented only 30 years ago and has still not met consensus or become standard.  Therefore it does not pass the "stable solution to a recurring problem" test (taking aspirin is also a solution to a recurring problem, and I would also discount that as the proper topic for a pattern).

I think a pattern's success hangs on two things: The first is the form as one which gives you the answer with accompanying rationale quickly.  We could discuss forms, etc.  The second is whether the author has managed to capture something so recurring, and a solution so neat, that the reader's feel compelled to agree, and feel that ahh! feeling on seeing a neat way of resolving old, conflicting forces.

What you say is still useful in explaining why patterns caught on, once they found an appropriate home and some champions.  It is the subject that does not come across to me as something I take as a subject for a pattern. I am similarly uncomfortable with ProcessPatterns, because I doubt the stability of the solutions. - - AlistairCockburn
