A WikiResearcher is an individual who researches WikiPhenomena, or perhaps the WikiPhenomenon.

''This construction makes no sense at all. We don't use "chemistry researcher" or "physics researcher".''

So...  Are you saying the self-proclaimed WikiResearcher who created this page should refer to himself as a Wikicist?

''Either as a social scientist or a media theorist. Wikis really aren't important enough to sustain a field.''

Perhaps Wikis aren't important ''to you'', and maybe they aren't important enough to sustain an entire Wiki Science, Wikism, Wikology, Wikography, Wikonomy, Wikistry, Wikiatry, or Wikiry, but they're certainly significant enough ''to those who are interested in the subject'' that the process of studying them is worthy of unique identification.  

Therefore, I hereby officially proclaim that any individual who wishes to refer to him or herself as a WikiResearcher or a Wikicist may do so.  Furthermore, from this point forward, the importance (or lack thereof) of an area or subject of study shall have no bearing on the selection, creation and application of terms, identifiers, and/or neologisms used to reference it.

''Very interesting.  I, however, claim that The Wiki is as significant as the ability to write and the invention of the wheel.  I shall argue this later.'' 

AhtiKare says:
Now it comes! You have perhaps hear the slogan ''NOKIA connect people''. It's really do so in Finland. It is almost imposible to see a person who don't keep the telephone on his or her ear. But this is only the network. The Wiki is much more, it is ''online database'' as Ward Cunningham says, people can save imformation and make quaries to database. When this is possible for everybody in the whole world, we can proclaim that the Wiki has created ''collective memory'' and the database characterizes ''the knowledge or the herodity of the whole world''. If we look to the future, we can see and imagin some tendencies. The database expands enormous, that is why, we must arrange imformation by assosiation and at the same time we prosessing the information in our brains. So we can say that we have beside of the collective memory, ''collective braincapacity''.
----
I like Wikistry the best. One who applies Wikis in whatever manner would under this field be called a Wikicist, if the the area of his/her/its concentration is to research, one might properly call that person/agent a Research Wikicist. There are many topics in Wiki one might research. Each of these might eventually form a specialty. For example one might form a specialty to research the ways in which Wikis are used by various individuals, groups, corporate entities and educational institutions. In doing so, a more specialized research goal might become: What existing wiki applications are best suited for a small, HomeOffice Enterprise, and in what way can it be most useful in that setting? When the research is finished, the researcher should write/compose/construct a paper/presentation/document summarizing the results of the research for peer review, (if in fact one has any peers interested and a forum in which it might be reviewed). -- ThinkingOutLoud.DonaldNoyes.20120528
----
CategoryWiki