Please see XpDocumentary.

Without attempting to be all things to all people, there is a distinct hierarchy within our intended audience. A high-level overview gives just a few key facts to the primary audience. Each chapter within the documentary becomes increasingly more detailed. We stop before becoming a tutorial. 

In all, the viewer profile watches PBS in the US, the BBC in the UK, and the Discovery Channel networks in the US and other countries where available. 

'''Primary Audience'''

Our principal audience are the policy-makers whom ultimately own the software development process. These are the executive officers, board members and managers responsible for budgets, profits and losses. 

The material presented earliest within the documentary targets those groups. The format is much like the executive summary of a business plan: reveal facts effecting the bottom line. 

'''Secondary Audience'''

Second to the management of corporations are other decision-makers such as a head of engineering, hiring manager, employment recruiters and technical consultants.  

Those in the programming community currently using other methodologies will learn enough about extreme programming to make an intelligent decision about adopting it.

For this group, the technical overview reveals enough detail that they may speak intelligently on the topic with an experienced practitioner. They get sufficient material to find more information on their own. 

Most of the programmers already practicing XP fall into the category of secondary audience. 

'''General Audience'''

Those curious about software development will find the architecture metaphors easy to grasp. Without a prior computer science or software development background, they will gain a base understanding of the extreme programming domain. 

----

I'll be bold enough to suggest a third audience, young computer enthusiasts who are learning to program. Although XP is not even remotely aimed at the casual programmer, casual programmers ''will'' be interested in learning about XP. If it's presented too much in a business-sense way, this will undoubtedly turn them off. Part of what I love about XP is the sense that I get of, "Yes! This is how it should be done!" I think if you could convey that feeling to a young programmer, you'll do a lot to spark further interest in programming, and to build a fan base for the next generation of professional programmers.

''Oops!  I mean, of course... I was just testing to see if anyone was paying attention, that's all.  Yeah, that's it.'' Fixed.  Thanks.--DanielPezely

----
Please see XpDocumentary.