An (informal) XP DocumentaryFilm project
----
I found it very difficult to learn XP from verbal languages -- books or postings, etc. I felt like it was learning a martial art from a book without a mentor aside. A lot of people told me that when they could '''see''' how XPers really do in front of their eyes, they could learn whole lot better. It was even better when they could '''play''' with the XPers.

We are planning to make a small informal XP DocumentaryFilm. I've gathered 9 or so people who want to join in our project. We'll be developing a small product learning and practicing XP, and record it with a digital home-cam. We guess it'll take about a month. (and some more to edit the film and the script)

At the end of the project, we hope to have a recording of our daily XP experiences, and some scripts with code snippets and commentaries here and there, which we are planning to publish through a IT book publisher or freely on the internet.

The book, which'll come with a CD-ROM containing the movie files, will carry a script of the film with some additional texts :
 
    (Around 13:40 June and Jiwon is doing PairProgramming with task Z)
    June : (tapping on the keyboards) How about doing this way?
    Jiwon : But... what about that class then?
    (Yong from the next table just jumps in)
    Yong : Are you still working on that problem? We just treated it as...
    [follows the code or something]

    (At the same time, Bum and Park is PairProgramming with task Y)
    they make sure that 20 unit tests all pass ok
    Bum : Hurrah!
    Park : Yah-----hoo!
    Bum just types in <cvs commit -m "Superman class can now fly" superman.java>
    Two in one voice : Voila!
    [here comes some expository description in a narrator's tone]

and the CD will record some important points of our development, a recorded documentary of our one-month experience with XP. Laughing, fighting, conversing, crying, and dancing.

--JuneKim

''What's the status of this project? (March 27, 2003)''

Now we are recording the film. It will be on the internet around May, 2003. Eight people are starring in this film, and one of them is the Customer. They make a typical web-based bulletin board in the film. A fully dedicated XP friendly war-room office with a lot of InformationRadiator''''''s and XP toys. There are about four kinds of scence in the film:
* whole shot of the office
* middle shot of the people discussing around the table or the wall(IR)
* close shot of a pair working at the computer
* full screen recording of the computer, which a pair is programming at. 

''Was this film ever released? Can we see it somewhere? (March 1, 2006)''
----
See also: DocumentaryFilm XpDocumentary