An example of this is detailed at http://www.jos.org/constitution.html

Yes and No mean the usual.

Abstain means you don't want to vote, but you don't want to keep the vote from getting a quorum, so your abstain vote counts towards the quorum to make the vote legal.

Neither means you disagree with how the vote is worded or procedure or something, and you don't want the vote to be legal at all.  Therefore a neither vote does not count towards getting a quorum. (See also MuAnswer.)

-------
The portions of the above document that pertain are here:

4.9 A vote is declared void if less than a quorum is reached. The quorum shall be calculated as a percent of the number of members of the voting information list. The quorum shall be 15% for "ordinary" votes and 25% for "extraordinary" votes. The procedure for tabulating the voting information list membership and resulting quorums shall be detailed in the policy book.

4.10 Valid votes shall be one of the following: [a] Yes (approve the proposal as stated) [b] No (disapprove the proposal as stated) [c] Neither with explanation (disagree with the phrasing of the question or some other procedural matter) [d] Abstain (no preference either way)

4.11 "Total vote count" shall be defined as the total of "yes", "no", and "neither" ballots received: votes for "Abstain" shall count towards calculating the quorum, but shall be ignored during the calculating the approval, failure to pass without prejudice, or rejection of a proposal; votes for "Neither" shall not count towards calculating the quorum, but shall count towards calculating the approval, failure to pass without prejudice, or rejection of a proposal. A proposal is considered to have been approved if the appropriate quorum was met and more than the appropriate minimum percent of total vote count were "yes" votes. A proposal is said to have been rejected if the appropriate quorum was met and more than the appropriate minimum percent of total vote count were "no" votes. A proposal is considered to have failed to pass without prejudice if neither "yes" nor "no" options reached the appropriate minimum percent of total vote count or if the appropriate quorum was not met. The appropriate minimum percent of total vote count for approval shall be 50% for "ordinary" votes and 66% for "extraordinary" votes. The appropriate minimum percent of total vote count for rejection shall be 50% for "ordinary" votes and 33% for "extraordinary" votes.

4.12 Members voting "neither" have the option of including an explanation of their reasons for voting this way with their vote. These explanations will be advertised with members names removed after voting has finished in the manner described in the policy book.

4.13 All vote proposals shall be worded in such a way that the status quo is maintained should the proposal not be approved or fail to pass without prejudice as defined in Article 4.11 of this document.
-----
Quite similar to RomanEvaluation, where the votes are '''yes, no,''' and '''abide.'''

----
CategoryVoting